A Leap Password based Veriﬁcation System
Aman Chahar *, Shivangi Yadav *, Ishan Nigam, Richa Singh, Mayank Vatsa
IIIT-Delhi, New Delhi, India
{aman11014, shivangi11104, ishann, mayank, rsingh}@iiitd.ac.in
Abstract
Recent developments in three-dimensional sensing de-
vices has led to the proposal of a number of biometric
modalities for non-critical scenarios. Leap Motion device
has received attention from Vision and Biometrics commu-
nity due to its high precision tracking. In this research, we
propose Leap Password; a novel approach for biometric au-
thentication. The Leap Password consists of a string of suc-
cessive gestures performed by the user during which physi-
ological as well as behavioral information is captured. The
Conditional Mutual Information Maximization algorithm
selects the optimal feature set from the extracted informa-
tion. Match-score fusion is performed to reconcile informa-
tion from multiple classiﬁers. Experiments are performed
on the Leap Password Dataset, which consists of over 1700
samples obtained from 150 subjects. An accuracy of over
81% is achieved, which shows the effectiveness of the pro-
posed approach.
1. Introduction
The emergence of specialized three-dimensional sensors
to track humans has opened up avenues in biometric re-
search to implement novel recognition systems. Such sys-
tems are ideally suited towards non-critical identiﬁcation
applications such as accessing public workplaces, amuse-
ment parks, and entering buildings. Development of sen-
sors such as Microsoft Kinect and Leap Motion has aided
the proposal of new authentication approaches as well as
augmentation of prior approaches. For example, face recog-
nition has now been studied extensively using Microsoft
Kinect [4, 7, 10, 13].
A Leap Motion device tracks a user’s hand in three-
dimensional space at a spatial resolution of 10−4 m and a
temporal resolution of 120 frames per second using infrared
sensors. The device can be used to capture the spatiotem-
poral trajectories of both hands of a user and thus, has ap-
plications in gesture recognition, handwriting analysis, and
∗Equal contribution from A. Chahar and S. Yadav.
Figure 1: Acquisition of Leap password: the subject is per-
forming ﬁngertap gesture.
biometric veriﬁcation. Vikram et al. [11] track the moving
patterns of ﬁngers and apply this information to handwrit-
ing recognition. Recently, Nigam et al. [9] have proposed
a biometric veriﬁcation system, termed as the Leap signa-
ture. The 3D signature, described as a pattern rendered by
the user in 3D space in absence of any tactile feedback or
obstruction, is an exclusively behavioral biometric trait. In-
formation from the 3D signature is captured by computing
Histogram of Oriented Optical Flow and Histogram of Ori-
ented Trajectory.
In this research, we explore the possibility of utilizing
physiological as well as behavioral information captured by
a Leap Motion device to verify the identity of the user. We
propose that the combination of several uncorrelated de-
scriptors such as time taken to perform successive charac-
ters of the gesture password (behavioral information), di-
mensions of the subject’s ﬁngers and palms (physiological
information), and the password itself (memorized gestures)
is likely to provide sufﬁcient discriminatory information to
be able to provide a high recognition performance.
In the proposed approach, the Leap Motion device is
used to allow the user to enter a password string consisting
of six gestures performed by using one of their ten ﬁngers
at a time. The extracted features are studied from the point
of view of their relevancy and redundancy, and a subset of
features is chosen which maximizes the conditional infor-
mation. This information is classiﬁed independently and
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:31:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
RDF
Neural Network
Weighted 
Match Score 
Fusion 
Decision
F1 F2 . . . . . .. F10 P1 P2
Geometry
P1
P2
F1
F2
F10
F9
F8
F7
F6
F5
F4 F3
T1  T2  T3  T4  T5 
Time
Gesture
G
F2
F4
F5
F7
F8
F9
P1
P2
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
G
Leap Motion
Sensor
Figure 2: Summary of the proposed aLPhabet method for Leap Password veriﬁcation.
match-score level fusion is performed. The key contribu-
tion of this research are:
1. Leap Passwords, 3D gesture based passwords which
capture physiological and behavioral information us-
ing the Leap Motion device, are proposed as a new
approach for person veriﬁcation.
2. A novel algorithm, termed as aLPhabet, is proposed to
encode information for the Leap Password.
3. Leap Password Dataset is collected which consists of
Leap Passwords from 150 individuals.
The dataset
also contains samples of intentional spooﬁng attempts
made by trained users.
2. Proposed aLPhabet Framework
The motivation for the proposed algorithm, termed as
aLPhabet, is the observation that a combination of un-
correlated physiological and behavioral information can be
highly discriminative and likely to provide a means to ver-
ify user’s identity with sufﬁcient conﬁdence. Figure 2 illus-
trates the steps involved in aLPhabet algorithm.
2.1. Information Captured from Leap Motion De-
vice
The Leap Motion device measures the physiological
characteristics of the user’s hands (Figure 2) at an extremely
high spatial resolution and also registers the points in time
when the successive gestures of the Leap Password are
performed with high precision. The following information
is captured by the Leap Motion device:
• Lengths of ten ﬁngers and widths of two palms of the
user, at a spatial resolution of 10−4m.
• Time taken by the user in performing successive ges-
tures of the Leap Password, at 120 frames per second.
2.2. Feature Extraction
From the raw features, three types of features are ex-
tracted and computed: (1) measurements of the ﬁngers and
palms of the user’s hands, (2) time taken by the user in per-
forming successive gestures in the Leap Password, and (3) a
similarity measure for the Leap Password performed by the
user compared to a gallery Leap Password. These features
are discussed in detail below.
2.2.1
Dimensions of ﬁngers and palms
The dimensions of the ﬁngers and the palms (in millime-
ters) captured by the Leap Motion device are utilized as the
ﬁrst set of features. Since the precision of the Leap Mo-
tion device is very high and measurements are captured dis-
tinctly, any post-processing is not performed for the physio-
logical information. The feature descriptor,⃗Fdim, is formed
by concatenating the captured measurements:⃗
Fdim = [F1, F2, ..., F9, F10, P1, P2]
(1)
where, Fi refers to the length of the ith ﬁnger and Pj refers
to the width of the jth palm.
2.2.2
Time taken between successive gestures
The time taken by a user to perform successive ﬁnger-
tap gestures provides discriminatory behavioral information
about the user. The Leap Password captures a string of 6
gestures performed by the user. The time taken by the user
between successive gestures (in milliseconds) is recorded
using the Leap Motion Software Development Kit, and the
behavioral feature,⃗Ftime, is formed by concatenating the
captured measurements:⃗
Ftime = [T1, T2, T3, T4, T5]
(2)
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:31:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
where, Ti is the time taken by the user between gestures gi
and gi+1.
2.2.3
Similarity measure for gesture password
The gesture password is a string of ﬁnger-tap gestures
performed by the user through any of their 10 ﬁngers, one
ﬁnger at a time. This password is compared to the password
of the claimed identity. The algorithm used to compute the
similarity score is the popular string matching method, the
Levenshtein algorithm [6].
Levenshtein Algorithm: Given two strings G1 and G2, the
edit distance G(G1, G2) is deﬁned as the minimal series of
edit operations that transform G1 into G2. The alphabet on
which the strings are deﬁned are 10 distinct characters - the
ﬁngers of the user. The following operations are permitted
for transforming the strings:
1. Insertion: If Gi = gi1gi2, insertion of the symbol gk
produces the string gi1gkgi2.
2. Deletion: If Gi = gi1gkgi2, deletion of the symbol gk
produces the string gi1gi2.
3. Substitution: If Gi = gi1gkgi2, substitution of the
symbol gk produces the string gi1glgi2, where gk̸ = gl.
Due to the frequent mistakes made by the sensor in de-
tecting taps and registering single taps as multiple taps, the
penalty afﬁxed for the Substitution operation is more than
the Insertion and Deletion operations. The information ex-
tracted from comparing the gesture password strings is the
scalar similarity measure, Edit Distance (G):
Fdist = G
(3)
From equations 1 to 3, features extracted from Leap
Password can be written as:⃗
Fcomp = [⃗Fdim,⃗Ftime, Fdist]
(4)
2.2.4
Entropy analysis of Leap Password
The Leap Password consists of 6 gestures. There are 10 pos-
sibilities (ﬁngers) for performing every gesture in the Leap
password. Hence, the total number of possible passwords
is 106. The range of ﬁnger dimensions will be a function
of the dataset’s population; the range for the Leap Password
Dataset is approximately 10mm, and the precision of the
Leap Motion device is 10-4mm. Hence, the number of pos-
sible ﬁnger dimensions is 10×104 for ten ﬁngers. Similarly,
the palm widths have a 20mm range; hence the number of
possible palm dimensions is 20 × 104 for two palms.
The range of the time taken between gestures in the Leap
Password Dataset is approximately 250 ms. The precision
of the Leap Motion device is 10-2 ms. Five such timestamps
are recorded during the gesture password. The total number
of possible gaps in time is, thus, 1.25 × 105. Hence, the
total number of possible Leap passwords is 5 × 1022.
2.3. Feature Selection
The discriminative capability offered by a feature at the
cost of increasing dimensionality is a critical trade-off. Fea-
ture selection improves prediction performance of classi-
ﬁers, provides faster and more cost-effective predictors, and
allows us to gain a better understanding of the underlying
processes that govern the generation of data [5].
We study ﬁlter-based criteria to select features that are
useful for classiﬁcation. The advantage of using ﬁlter-based
selection methods lies in their effective computation time
and robustness to overﬁtting [2]. The selection criterion (J)
is a measure of correlation between the feature (Xk) and
the class label (Y ); a strong correlation implies a greater
predictive ability when the feature is used in the presence of
the currently selected feature subset (S):
J(Xk) = I(Xk; Y |S)
(5)
In this research, we apply the Conditional Mutual In-
formation Maximization criterion (JCMIM), proposed by
Fleuret [3]:
JCMIM(Xk) = (Xk;Y )−maxXj ∈S[I(Xk;Xj)−I(Xk;Xj|Y )]
where, I represents mutual information, Xk represents a
feature, Y represents class label, and S represents the set
of features that have been selected prior to processing Xk.
From⃗Fcomp, the feature vector computed from Leap
Password, JCMIM criterion selects relevant features and a
new representation,⃗Fselect, is selected based on the min-
imum misclassiﬁcation accuracy obtained on the training
set. In context of the proposed algorithm, we observe that
the following features are selected:⃗
Fselect = [F2, F4, F5, F7, F8, F9, P1, P2,⃗Ftime, Fdist]
(6)
2.4. Classiﬁcation and Fusion
The suitability of each class of features (⃗Fdim,⃗Fdist,⃗
Ftime) is explored independently as well as in combina-
tion with other classes of features (⃗Fcomp) using the Na¨ıve
Bayes (NB), Neural Network (NNET), and Random Deci-
sion Forest (RDF) classiﬁers. Further, match-score level fu-
sion is explored to analyze the effect of combining scores
obtained from different classiﬁers such that,
Scorefuse = P
i Wi ∗scorei
(7)
where, scorei is the score obtained from the ith classiﬁer
and Wi is the associated weight.
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:31:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
3. Leap Password Dataset
Leap Motion based biometric authentication is relatively
unexplored and to the best of our knowledge, the IIITD
Leap Signature Dataset [9] is the only publicly available
Leap Motion device dataset. However, as discussed pre-
viously, Leap Signatures do not capture any physiological
subject information. Therefore, another major contribution
of this research is the release of the Leap Password Dataset
(LPD) 1. This database consists of information captured
from 150 subjects performing ﬁxed-length gesture pass-
words on a Leap Motion device. The following information
is recorded from samples provided by users:
1. Dimensions of the palms and ﬁngers of user’s hands.
2. Similarity measure for the password entered by the
user and the user’s password enrolled in the dataset.
3. Time taken to input successive gestures by the user.
In order to study the resilience of the proposed algorithm
towards intentional impostor attempts, spooﬁng samples
are also created by three different individuals: two males
(one medium build, one large build) and one female (small
build), their age ranging from 21 to 23 years. Each spooﬁng
impostor is shown the complete gesture password for every
subject and given sufﬁcient time to acclimatize themselves
with the password string and to perform the Leap Password.
Each impostor records two spooﬁng attempts for every sub-
ject. Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the dataset.
The dataset consists of 2 subsets with no overlap between
subjects: Leap Password Dataset Train (LPD Train) and
Leap Password Dataset Test (LPD Test). Both subsets are
captured in similar environments and under identical con-
straints. LPD Test consists of a higher number of samples
per subject to extensively test the proposed system.
4. Experimental Analysis
The performance of the proposed aLPhabet algorithm
for biometric veriﬁcation is analyzed on the Leap Password
Dataset.
As discussed in Section 2, the aLPhabet algo-
rithm has the following stages: feature extraction, feature
selection, classiﬁcation, and fusion. Experiments are per-
formed to analyze the relevance and redundancy contributed
by each feature and an exhaustive analysis of the optimal
recognition strategy is performed using Neural Network,
Na¨ıve Bayes, Random Decision Forest classiﬁers.
4.1. Analysis of Features and Classiﬁers
We begin by analyzing the features extracted from the
Leap Motion device. Since the information descriptor con-
sists of information from diverse sources including physio-
1http://www.iab-rubric.org/resources/lpd.html
Table 1: The Leap Password Dataset (LPD)
Number of unique subjects
150
Samples per subject
5-12
Number of samples in dataset
1275
Number of spooﬁng attempts in dataset
450
Number of total samples in dataset
1725
Training Data (LPD Train)
Number of subjects
75
Samples per subject
5
Number of total samples in dataset
375
Testing Data (LPD Test)
Number of subjects
75
Samples per subject
12
Spooﬁng attempts per subject
6
Number of total samples in dataset
1350
logical and behavioral information, we consider classiﬁca-
tion using different algorithms, namely, Na¨ıve Bayes (pre-
dictive classiﬁer), neural network (discriminative classiﬁer),
and random decision forest (ensemble classiﬁer). A com-
parative analysis of features taken independently as well
as in combination is provided in Table 2. It is observed
that geometry features yield better performance than other
features. We also perform classiﬁcation for pair-wise fea-
ture representations, but it is observed that these representa-
tions do not yield high accuracy. With all the features con-
catenated and RDF classiﬁer 75.47% Genuine Accept Rate
(GAR) is achieved at 1% False Accept Rate (FAR).
4.2. Analysis of Feature Selection
Since the basis of using feature selection algorithms is to
maximize relevance and minimize redundancy, it is critical
to assess the ranking of the Leap Password features pro-
vided by the CMIM criterion. It is:
T1 > T2 > T3 > T4 > ED > T5 > F7 > F8 > P1 > P2...
... F2 > F4 > F5 > F9 > F10 > F1 > F3 > F6
(8)
During exploratory analysis and during the preparation
of the Leap Password Dataset, it is observed that the thumbs
(F6, F10) are consistently mis-tracked while the index ﬁn-
gers (F2, F7) are consistently tracked by the Leap Motion
device. CMIM ranks the two thumb features among the
three lowest features extracted from the Leap Password.
Since the physiological information for the ﬁngers extracted
from a user’s left and right hand ﬁngers is likely to be simi-
lar for corresponding pairs of ﬁngers, it is observed that the
ﬁve lowest features consist of atleast one ﬁnger correspond-
ing to one out of the thumb, middle, ring, and little ﬁngers.
Brown et al. [1] have proposed that the Joint Mutual
Information (JMI) criterion [12] provides the best trade-
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:31:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
Table 2: Genuine accept rates (%) at 1% false accept rates of independent feature types and their fusion.
Classiﬁer
Individual Features
All features
without CMIM
All features
with CMIM
All features
with JMI
Time
Geometry
Gesture
Na¨ıve Bayes
43.39
67.29
29.13
71.29
75.78
66.75
Random Decision Forest
34.69
50.95
28.91
75.47
78.04
67.43
Neural Network
46.81
59.62
28.91
73.82
78.55
38.44
10-3
10-2
10-1
0.4
0.6
0.8
NNET
NNET - CMIM
RDF
RDF - CMIM
1.0
False Positive Rate
True Positive Rate
Figure 3: Performance of feature fusion and selection.
off in terms of accuracy and stability with small data sam-
ples. Experiments are performed to compare several fea-
ture selection criteria with JMI. It is observed that the Con-
ditional Mutual Information Maximization (CMIM) crite-
rion [3] outperforms JMI. A summary of the performance
of CMIM and JMI algorithms is provided in Table 2 along
with the recognition performance of the classiﬁers in the
absence of feature selection.
4.3. Statistical Analysis
The McNemar test [8] provides a measure of the statisti-
cal correlation of the recognition performance of two clas-
siﬁers. At 0.05 signiﬁcance level, a χ2 ≥3.84 suggests that
the accuracies obtained by the two classiﬁers are statisti-
cally different. We analyze the above-mentioned classiﬁers
in pairs of two classiﬁers each using the McNemar test (3)
and compute the χ2-scores as follows:
χ2 = (N01 −N10)2
N01 + N10
(9)
where, N01 and N10 represent the frequency of misclassiﬁ-
cations made by one of the algorithms while the other algo-
rithm classiﬁes correctly. The χ2-score values, as observed
in Table 3, are above the threshold for the comparison of
True Positive Rate
False Positive Rate
10-3
10-2
10-1
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
NB-RDF
NB-RDF Weighted
NNET-RDF
NNET-RDF Weighted
Figure 4: Performance of match-score fusion.
random decision forest with Na¨ıve Bayes (χ2 = 40.04) and
neural network classiﬁers (χ2 = 34.17). However, when
comparing neural network with Na¨ıve Bayes classiﬁer, it
fails to predict statistical independence.
4.4. Analysis of Score-level Fusion
From Table 2, it is observed that for the features selected
by the CMIM criterion (⃗Fselect) Na¨ıve Bayes, random deci-
sion forest, as well as neural network classiﬁers yield simi-
lar recognition performance. As observed above, the com-
bination of random decision forest with Na¨ıve Bayes clas-
siﬁer and the combination of random decision forest with
neural network classiﬁers is found to be statistically inde-
pendent. Match-score fusion is performed for these classi-
ﬁers in the following ways: sum score fusion, weighted sum
score fusion, and SVM score fusion (scores are fed to a lin-
ear SVM and output is treated as a match score). Table 4
summarizes the results for these match-score fusion exper-
iments. It is observed that a weighted sum of match-scores
for random decision forest and neural network classiﬁers
achieves a genuine accept rate of 81.17% at a false accept
rate of 1% (Figure 5). The spooﬁng samples that are devel-
oped as part of the database are used to analyze the effect of
attacks on Leap Password. We observe that 8% of spooﬁng
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:31:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
Table 3: Comparison of statistical correlation of classiﬁers - McNemar Test.
Decision
NNET +
NNET -
Decision
NNET +
NNET -
Decision
NB +
NB -
RDF +
396641
3160
NB +
395385
4416
RDF +
395496
3857
RDF -
2712
2037
NB -
3841
908
RDF -
3730
1467
χ2 score
34.17
χ2 score
2.12
χ2 score
40.04
attempts succeed at gaining access in the proposed system.
The high number of successful spooﬁng attempts is likely
caused due to (i) errors in ﬁnger detection in the Leap Mo-
tion device due to sensor level noise, and (ii) the assump-
tion that the intruder has obtained the gesture password via
shoulder surﬁng.
Table 4: GAR at 1% FAR for match-score level fusion.
Sum Rule
Weighted
Fusion
SVM Fusion
NB and RDF
75.64%
78.77
76.34
RDF and NNET
80.77
81.17
75.58
5. Conclusion and Future Work
This research introduces the Leap Password, a biometric
authentication approach which combines physiological and
behavioral information. The proposed algorithm, aLPhabet,
utilizes the physiological and behavioral information cap-
tured via Leap Motion device. Features such as geometry
of ﬁngers and palms, time taken by the user to perform the
Leap gesture password, and the gesture password are used
for veriﬁcation purposes. In conjunction, classiﬁers such as
RDF and neural network are used for classiﬁcation. On the
prepared Leap Password Dataset, we achieve 81% GAR at
1% FAR. This shows the promise towards this novel bio-
metric authentication approach. As a future research direc-
tion, we plan to study the possibility of incorporating addi-
tional information from the Leap Motion device to provide
more discriminatory capabilities to the aLPhabet algorithm,
and minimize spooﬁng attempts.
References
[1] G. Brown, A. Pocock, M.-J. Zhao, and M. Luj´an. Con-
ditional likelihood maximisation: A unifying frame-
work for information theoretic feature selection. Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research, 13:27–66, 2012.
[2] W. Duch. Feature Extraction: Foundations and Ap-
plications, Chapter 3, volume 207. Springer-Verlag
Berlin Heidelberg, 2006.
[3] F. Fleuret. Binary feature selection with conditional
mutual information. Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search, 5.
[4] G. Goswami, M. Vatsa, and R. Singh.
RGB-D
Face Recognition With Texture and Attribute Fea-
tures.
IEEE Transactions in Information Forensics
and Security, 2014.
[5] I. Guyon and A. Elisseeff. An introduction to variable
and feature selection. Journal of Machine Learning
Research, 3:1157–1182, 2003.
[6] V. I. Levenshtein. Binary codes capable of correct-
ing deletions, insertions and reversals. Soviet Physics
Doklady, 10(8):707–710, 1966.
[7] B. Li, A. Mian, W. Liu, and A. Krishna. Using Kinect
for face recognition under varying poses, expressions,
illumination and disguise. In IEEE Winter Conference
on Applications of Computer Vision, pages 186–192,
Jan 2013.
[8] Q. McNemar. Note on the sampling error of the differ-
ence between correlated proportions or percentages.
Psychometrika, 12(2):153–157, 1947.
[9] I. Nigam, M. Vatsa, and R. Singh.
Leap signature
recognition using HOOF and HOT features. In 21st
IEEE International Conference on Image Processing,
2014.
[10] M. Pamplona Segundo,
S. Sarkar,
D. Goldgof,
L. Silva, and O. Bellon.
Continuous 3D Face Au-
thentication Using RGB-D Cameras. In IEEE CVPR-
Workshops, pages 64–69, June 2013.
[11] S. Vikram, L. Li, and S. Russell. Writing and Sketch-
ing in the Air, Recognizing and Controlling on the
Fly. In Proceedings of CHI 2013 Extended Abstracts,
pages 1179–1184. ACM, 2013.
[12] H. H. Yang and J. E. Moody. Data Visualization and
Feature Selection: New Algorithms for Nongaussian
Data. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pages 687–702, 1999.
[13] Z. Zhang.
Microsoft Kinect Sensor and Its Effect.
IEEE MultiMedia, 2012.
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:31:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
