IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 65, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016
305
Static and Dynamic Hand Gesture Recognition in
Depth Data Using Dynamic Time Warping
Guillaume Plouffe and Ana-Maria Cretu, Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper discusses the development of a natural
gesture user interface that tracks and recognizes in real time hand
gestures based on depth data collected by a Kinect sensor. The
interest space corresponding to the hands is ﬁrst segmented based
on the assumption that the hand of the user is the closest object in
the scene to the camera. A novel algorithm is proposed to improve
the scanning time in order to identify the ﬁrst pixel on the hand
contour within this space. Starting from this pixel, a directional
search algorithm allows for the identiﬁcation of the entire hand
contour. The k-curvature algorithm is then employed to locate
the ﬁngertips over the contour, and dynamic time warping is
used to select gesture candidates and also to recognize gestures
by comparing an observed gesture with a series of prerecorded
reference gestures. The comparison of results with state-of-the-art
approaches shows that the proposed system outperforms most of
the solutions for the static recognition of sign digits and is similar
in terms of performance for the static and dynamic recognition of
popular signs and for the sign language alphabet. The solution
simultaneously deals with static and dynamic gestures as well
as with multiple hands within the interest space. An average
recognition rate of 92.4% is achieved over 55 static and dynamic
gestures. Two possible applications of this work are discussed
and evaluated: one for interpretation of sign digits and gestures
for a friendlier human–machine interaction and the other one
for the natural control of a software interface.
Index Terms—Dynamic gestures, hand gesture recognition,
human–computer interaction, Red Green Blue - Depth (RGB-D)
sensor, static gestures.
I. INTRODUCTION
R
ECENT years have witnessed an increased research
interest in the development of natural intuitive user
interfaces. Such interfaces have to remain invisible to the users,
allowing them to unobtrusively interact with an application,
without the need for specialized and costly equipment. They
have to support a natural interaction and be adaptable to the
user without imposing elaborate calibration procedures. At the
same time, they have to fulﬁll their role in real time, with
accuracy, and provide robustness against background clutter.
These various requirements and their inherent complexity still
provide signiﬁcant challenges for researchers.
As hand gestures constitute a powerful interhuman commu-
nication modality, they can be considered as well an intuitive
Manuscript received May 3, 2015; revised August 27, 2015; accepted
September 21, 2015. Date of publication November 20, 2015; date of current
version January 4, 2016. This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada. The Associate Editor coordinating
the review process was Dr. Shervin Shirmohammadi.
The authors are with the Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Université du Québec en Outaouais, Gatineau, QC J8X 3X7, Canada (e-mail:
ana-maria.cretu@uqo.ca).
Color versions of one or more of the ﬁgures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TIM.2015.2498560
and convenient mean for the communication between human
and machines. This justiﬁes the interest of the research com-
munity in the development and advancement of hand gesture
technologies. One of the most important abilities of an efﬁcient
natural user interface is therefore its ability to recognize in real
time hand gestures.
The principal components of a hand recognition system
are data acquisition, hand localization (e.g., segmentation and
tracking), hand feature identiﬁcation, and gesture recognition
based on identiﬁed features. The classic solution for data
acquisition is color cameras that have already been success-
fully employed for gesture recognition tasks [1]–[3]. These
solutions are, however, sensitive to clutter, lighting conditions,
and skin color. Video capture has the extra challenge related to
the speed of movement. In terms of 3-D motion capture at the
level of the ﬁngers, possible solutions include optical marker
systems, accelerometers, magnetic trackers, and data gloves.
These require extensive calibration, limit the natural movement
of the ﬁngers, and are generally very expensive. The vision-
based markerless motion capture became possible largely due
to the introduction on the market of the Kinect, a low-cost
off-the-shelf
sensor
that
gathers
positional
information
about an individual’s motion. Data captured by this sensor,
in RGB-D (color and depth information) form, are often
used as a source for hand gesture detection and recognition.
While a good survey for the gesture recognition in general is
available in [4] and one focused on depth images in [5], the
following literature review brieﬂy summarizes the solutions
that make use of RGB-D data for the purpose of hand gesture
recognition.
Different approaches can be employed for hand localization
in acquired data, according to their nature. For depth data,
the classical solution is depth thresholding, either empirical or
automated. Empirical solutions choose the limits of the most
probable search space by trial and error and concentrate the
computation effort on the hand localization within it. Among
the automated solutions are the detection of the closest point
to the camera [6]–[10] based on the assumption that the hand
is the closest object in the scene and the use of other reference
elements in the scene, such as the head position [11]–[13]
or the facial color information [3] to identify the most possi-
ble location of the hand. An exhaustive solution is to scan
the entire visibility space of the Kinect using overlapping
depth intervals until the hands are found [14]. This can be,
however, a very lengthy process. In terms of color images,
possible solutions for hand segmentation include skin color
detection [1], [3], [12], [15]–[17] and Haar-like features [2].
0018-9456 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:18:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
306
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 65, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016
Finally, certain approaches in the literature beneﬁt from both
depth and color information [7], [15]–[22]. Some systems
impose the intervention of the user to calibrate the system
prior to its use; for example, in [20], the location of the hand is
recuperated from a wave gesture executed by the user. Others
impose constraints, such as the fact that the user wears a
colored glove [22] or a black belt on the wrist of the gesturing
hand [7], [18], [23] in order to simplify the hand localization
procedure and its segmentation. These solutions impede on
the invisibility of the interface to the user. Finally, Ryan [14]
favors the middle of the screen as an area of higher likelihood
for hand detection, therefore avoiding the search along the
image sides in order to improve the response time. Such a
system constrains the user to adapt its behavior to the interface.
After the hand localization, the next step is the selec-
tion of appropriate features that allow for the recognition
of gestures. Among the solutions encountered in the litera-
ture for depth data are hand contour, hand palm center [6],
[14], ﬁnger properties (e.g., count and direction) [24], hand
trajectory [11], [25], and gradient kernel descriptors [21],
while for color data, popular choices are Haarlet features
[20], Gabor features [26], [27], Scale Invariant Feature Trans-
form (SIFT) [21], Speeded Up Robust Features (SURF) [15],
Hu moment invariants [17], Histogram of Oriented Gradi-
ents (HOG) [28], [29] descriptors, and shape distance metrics,
such as the ﬁnger–earth mover’s distance [7], [18], [19].
Otiniano-Rodríguez and Cámara-Chávez [21], Abid et al. [28],
and Dardas and Georganas [30] combine features using a bag-
of-visual-words approach prior to recognition. For the recogni-
tion of gestures from the selected features, possible techniques
proposed in the literature are neural networks [11], [20],
Support Vector Machines (SVMs) [15], [28], [30], nearest
neighbor classiﬁers [8], [10], random forests [26], fuzzy
approaches [1], and hidden Markov models [15], [27], [29].
Alternatively, a simple method that takes into consideration
the position of middle and end points of a gesture trajectory
with respect to the initial points is proposed in [17]. Most of
the existing solutions for gesture recognition are designed for
use either on static [8], [10], [20], [21], [24], [26], [31], [32] or
on dynamic gestures [11], [28], [33], [34]. Overall, there are
only very few solutions that simultaneously work on both static
and dynamic gestures [12], [25], [27]. Moreover, most of the
current solutions are able to handle a single hand [1], [7], [15],
[18], [21], [26], [29], [31], [32] or two hands [14], [17], [24].
To the best of our knowledge, there are no solutions that can
track and recognize gestures from multiple hands, as the one
proposed in this paper. The results, in most cases in form of
average recognition rates, are presented on data sets of selected
static and/or dynamic gestures varying from 6 to 42 gestures:
6 in [32], 10 in [8], 12 in [10], 14 in [17] and [24], 24 (or 26)
[gestures of the American sign language (ASL) alphabet; two
gestures in this alphabet are dynamic and some authors work
on static gestures only] in [9] and [21], and 42 gestures
in [27]. Most results are reported for a single hand [7], [9],
[27], [34] and a few for two hands [17], [24].
The objective of this paper is to develop an improved,
low-complexity, and real-time solution for the recognition
of both static and dynamic gestures executed by one or
multiple hands from depth data returned by a Kinect sensor.
The gain in performance and speed comes from multiple
improvements in the various stages of the solution, including
a faster algorithm to search the ﬁrst pixel of the hand contour;
the recognition of gestures independent of their position in the
ﬁeld of view of the Kinect; the use and adaptation of dynamic
time warping (DTW) not only as a validation tool [14] but
also as a selector for candidate gestures; the normalization of
disparity values to improve the recognition rate in the case of
multiple hand detection; the use of constraints on the contour
to ensure it is closed; and the use of contour information for
recognition only in cases when no ﬁngertips are identiﬁed,
in order to improve the computation time. Moreover, the
proposed approach offers an interface that allows the user
to train the system with his/her desired gestures and rapidly
test its performance. According to a recent review on gesture
recognition [5], this is one missing aspect of current solutions:
the capacity to learn a gesture set from the user. The interface
is invisible to the user in the sense that it does not require
any constraints or calibration procedure. Due to the fact that
our system is based only on depth information, cluttered
backgrounds, lighting conditions, clothing, or skin color have
little impact on the reported performance.
Gesture recognition has multiple applications in the context
of sign language interpretation [21], [26], [27], smart home
interactive control [33], control of a software interface [18],
[19], [35] control of virtual environments [15], human–robot
interaction [20], [36], and robot hand control [22]. Among
the possible applications of this work, two are evaluated in
the context of this paper: one for the real-time interpretation
of sign language digits and gestures and the other one in the
context of natural control of a software application.
II. PROPOSED SOLUTION FOR HAND DETECTION AND
GESTURE RECOGNITION IN DEPTH DATA
The proposed framework for hand detection and gesture
recognition is illustrated in Fig. 1. Raw data coming from
the Kinect are used to recuperate depth information on all the
pixels of an image. A novel faster algorithm is then proposed
to identify each point of a closed contour identiﬁed within a
given depth interval.
Starting from the recuperated contour points, the center
of the palm is identiﬁed as the center of the largest circle
circumscribed in the contour. The ﬁngertips are localized by
employing the k-curvature algorithm, which is based on the
change in the slope angle of the tangent line at selected points
over the contour. During the execution, the hand information
(contour, palm center, and ﬁngertips) is stored in a ﬁxed-
size First In First Out (FIFO) list. This list contains data on
reference gestures that can be recorded by a user, according
to the speciﬁc needs of the application. The same list is also
used by the DTW algorithm in order to recognize previously
recorded reference gestures.
A. Contour Detection and Tracking
From the 16-bit raw data collected by the Windows
Software
Development
Kit
(SDK)
1.8
for
Kinect,
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:18:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
PLOUFFE AND CRETU: STATIC AND DYNAMIC HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION IN DEPTH DATA USING DTW
307
Fig. 1.
Proposed framework for hand detection and gesture recognition.
Fig. 2.
Inspection interval with respect to minimum distance pixel.
the
last
13
bits
represent
the
depth
information.
A 3-bit shift operation is performed to retain only this
information. Each time a new frame becomes available from
the Kinect, the depth information is recuperated and used to
detect one or multiple hand contours.
1) Detection of the Interest Space: In order to guide the
search for the hand contour, the proposed solution starts by
identifying the minimal distance (closest) pixel to the Kinect,
as illustrated in Fig. 2, based on the assumption that the hand
is the closest object to the camera in the scene. The depth
of this pixel is considered to represent the minimal depth
for inspection, and a constant (its value corresponding to the
interval of inspection, i.e., an empirically determined value
of 20 cm in this paper) is added in order to calculate the
maximum depth within which a search is performed for the
hands. The search for the hand(s) occurs only within this
limited space.
This approach is simple and does not impose signiﬁcant
limitations for the user, as we naturally tend to keep the hands
in front of the body when we gesticulate. In order not to
have to be constrained by the closest pixel, a possible solution
is to use other elements in the Kinect image as a reference.
For example, the skeleton tracking feature of Kinect could be
employed to identify the hand position as a reference element.
However, due to the fact that this joint is among the least stable
joints to track using the Kinect SDK [37], this solution was
not retained in this work.
2) Search of the First Pixel of a Contour: A search is
performed within the inspection interval to identify the ﬁrst
pixel that has at least one neighboring pixel that is not
Fig. 3.
Proposed algorithm for the detection of the ﬁrst point of the contour
inspecting each block of 20 × 20 pixels.
included in the inspection interval. To optimize the search,
[14] proposes to inspect every other 5 pixels (e.g., blocks
of 5 × 5) and does not take into consideration the pixels
around the edges of the image (20% of pixel lines).
In this paper, the search algorithm is improved as follows:
a pixel is considered valid for inspection if it is present at a
depth inside the inspection interval illustrated in Fig. 2. Any
other pixel is ignored in the analysis of the frame. The search
takes place in blocks of 20 × 20 pixels. If a pixel is valid and
if it does not possess any neighboring pixel that is valid, the
search continues pixel by pixel toward an invalid neighboring
pixel until a contour pixel is found, as illustrated in Fig. 3.
We verify if this pixel is part of an already found contour
and, if not, a new potential hand is found.
If a pixel is valid and none of the neighboring pixels
are invalid, the search continues with the next block. This
algorithm results in a faster search. Because the Kinect is used
with a resolution of 640 × 480 pixels, each image contains
307200 pixels. In the worst case, the proposed algorithm
covers maximum 768 pixels (307200/400) to conﬁrm that an
image does not contain any hand. An improvement of 99.75%
[or 100 −(768/307 200) × 100] is therefore achieved for an
image of 640×480 with respect to a full search. The proposed
solution improves the search time by 15.25% with respect to
the solution proposed in [14], and unlike the latter, it does not
restrict the search to the central part of the image.
3) Contour Point Detection: Once the initial contour pixel
is found, a directional search is performed to identify the full
contour of the hand, as in [14]. In the context of this paper, the
considered directions are upper left, upper right, bottom left,
and bottom right. A search direction is favored if it has been
used for the previous pixel as well. The algorithm also includes
a solution to backtrack if an unknown valid conﬁguration is
encountered. To further improve this approach, in this paper,
a constraint is added to validate only closed contours, as
illustrated in the pseudocode of Algorithm 1.
The detected contour using this procedure for the OK sign
in Fig. 4(a) is shown in Fig. 4(b). In order to identify more
than one hand, once the closed contour points of the ﬁrst
hand are discovered, the algorithm continues the search for
the ﬁrst pixel of the next contour and repeats the process until
it reaches the end of the image. The pseudocode above is
therefore repeated in a for loop for the detection of multiple
hands.
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:18:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
308
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 65, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016
Algorithm 1 Contour Point Detection
Input:
The ﬁrst point, P1, of a list of contour points belonging
to a potential hand contour, C
Output:
List of contour points Pi belonging to an identiﬁed
contour C
For each potential hand contour C
From the ﬁrst point P1 found, trace in order each point
of contour and stop when the C.length > 700 or when
the next point is already present in the contour list.
// if the last point is near the ﬁrst point
if ((C.length > 10 and (|LastPoint.x – P1.x| <= 15
pixels and |LastPoint.y −P1.y| <= 15 pixels and
|LastPoint.z −P1.z| <= 15 pixels)) then
the Contour C is accepted
Display the contour points in red
else
the Contour C is rejected
end
Fig. 4.
(a) Initial OK gesture. (b) Detected contour. (c) Largest circle
contained in the palm (yellow circle) and identiﬁed palm center (green dot).
(d) Angle calculation for ﬁngertip direction computation. (e) Identiﬁed
ﬁngertips (magenta dots).
B. Hand Palm Center Localization
Similar to the approach in [6], the hand palm center is
calculated using the contour pixels as well as the interior
pixels of the hand. To identify the bounding box of the hand,
the minimum and maximum points on the X and Y axes are
computed. The minimal distance (dmin) of interior pixels is
then calculated for each block of 5 × 5 pixels with respect
to each contour pixel. One contour pixel in ﬁve was exper-
imentally proved to be sufﬁcient for the ﬁnal estimation of
the hand center. The interior pixel that has the maximal value
for dmin is considered to be the center of the palm.
In simple terms, the center of the palm is the center of the
largest circle that can be circumscribed in the palm, as illus-
trated in Fig. 4(c) for the case of the OK sign. The proposed
approach is summarized in the pseudocode of Algorithm 2.
C. Localization of Fingertips
The k-curvature algorithm is employed to identify the
ﬁngertips over the hand contour. The choice of this algorithm
is justiﬁed by the fact that recent research showed that when
compared with other solutions for static hand recognition,
it provided the best results in terms of overall success rate,
supported the highest range of hand rotations within which it is
Algorithm 2 Palm Center Localization
Input:
C = List of contour point from the hand (obtained using
Algorithm 1)
I = List of points inside the contour
Output:
Index of palm center coordinates in list I
1.
For each element i of I:
For each element c of C:
Calculate the Euclidian distance di between
i and c
If di > di min then
di min = di
If di min < di max, then
Return to step 1
end
Return the minimum Euclidean distance value obtained
for i, di min
end
2.
Return the center of palm = element i of I with the
maximum Euclidean distance value obtained,
di max = max(di min).
Display a green circle at the coordinates of the
palm center.
capable of performing reliably, and had the lowest complexity
in terms of speciﬁc steps [31]. In simple terms, and as
illustrated in Fig. 4(d), the algorithm uses two equal-length
measuring tapes, VA and VB, of 20 pixels each (e.g., step size,
k = 20 pixels) and measures at each point the angle α between
them [e.g., between P(i−k) −> P(i) and P(i) −> P(i+k)]
over the contour of the hand. If the angle has a value between
25° and 55°, a ﬁngertip is considered identiﬁed at that point.
These angle limiting values are experimentally identiﬁed by
trial and error. The pseudocode of the algorithm is summarized
in Algorithm 3, and the detected ﬁngertips for the OK sign
are shown in magenta dots in Fig. 4(d) and (e).
While sometimes this algorithm can lead to false ﬁngertip
detection, particularly when the ﬁngers of the user are thin
and/or when they are very close to each other, the situation was
not encountered frequently enough to be addressed. A possible
solution to this problem would be to use an extra constraint on
the distance between the center of the palm and the ﬁngertips
as well as between the ﬁngertips. In addition, a solution could
be added for the prediction of a missing ﬁnger by computing
the mean of movements in previous consecutive images, as
in [14]. All these would nevertheless have a negative impact
on the hand tracking time, while not necessarily bringing
signiﬁcant detection improvements.
D. Gesture Recognition Using Dynamic Time Warping
While static recognition can be accomplished by stan-
dard pattern recognition techniques (e.g., template matching),
dynamic gesture recognition requires the incorporation of
a time component in the process. Among the most often
employed techniques are time-compressing templates, DTW,
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:18:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
PLOUFFE AND CRETU: STATIC AND DYNAMIC HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION IN DEPTH DATA USING DTW
309
Algorithm 3 Fingertip Localization
Input:
C = List of hand contour points
P1 = ﬁrst point of the contour C
cA = Start point of vector VA
cB = End point of vector VB
Output:
Series of points Pf representing the detected ﬁngertips
k = 20; cA = P1 – k;cB = P1 + k
For each element c of C:
if c < k then
cA = C.length - k+ c
else
cA = c – k
end
if c > C.length then
cB = k - C.length + c
else
cB = c +k
end
create vector VA(C[cA], C[c])
create vector VB(C[c], C[cB])
calculate θ(c) = arcos

VA·VB
VA.length∗VB.length
 (in radians)
transform θ (c) in degrees
If θ (c) <= 55 and θ (c) >= 25
// ﬁngertip detected
display a magenta dot of coordinates c representing the
ﬁngertip
end
hidden Markov models, and time-delayed neural networks [4].
In the context of this work, the DTW algorithm is used to
compare the similarity between a reference and a captured
gesture, whether the gesture is static or dynamic. The proposed
approach allows the user to record a sequence of reference
gestures that are saved in an FIFO list. In order to ensure
real-time behavior of the system, this list is limited to
40 images. When the recording is ﬁnished, these images
are saved in an xml ﬁle. Once a sequence of new images
representing a gesture being executed is made available by
the Kinect, the recognition module is activated to recognize it
based on the features identiﬁed in Sections II-B and II-C.
The gesture recognition module executes two steps: 1) the
search of candidate gestures based on the similarity between
the last image of the observed gesture and each reference
gesture and 2) the validation of the similarity between the
observed gesture and each identiﬁed candidate reference ges-
ture using the DTW matrix. For the ﬁrst step, [14] compares
the last image of an observed gesture with the last image
of each reference gesture in the list of reference gestures
by calculating the Euclidian distance. If the reference gesture
associated with the lowest distance is within a threshold, the
gesture is considered to be a possible candidate. While simple
and fast, this solution fails to distinguish between two dynamic
gestures whose last image is identical, because it compares
only the latter in order to recognize a gesture. To cope with
Fig. 5.
Gesture disparity calculation between the (a) observed and
(b) and (c) stored gestures for the selection of gesture candidates.
this problem, we propose the use of DTW algorithm [38], [39]
not only for validation [in step 2)], but also as a mean to
identify the best candidate among a list of possible candidates
[in step 1)]. The impact of this choice is further illustrated in
Section III.
The DTW algorithm calculates the disparity (inverse of
similarity) between two data series acquired at different times.
A matrix containing the Euclidian distances at aligned points
over the two sequences is used to calculate the minimal
cost (shortest path) between the two series. The choice of
direction for the shortest path is associated with certain rules.
In particular, the movement is restricted to horizontal, vertical,
and diagonal directions. A weight is associated with each of
these directions, and the shortest path has to be inferior to
a threshold in order for the two sequences to be considered
similar. In the context of this work, the two series represent
the sequences of hand positions in an observed and a ref-
erence gesture, respectively. To allow for the recognition of
gestures independent of their position on the screen, in step 1),
we use the position of ﬁngertips with respect to the center of
the palm(s) and the relative position of the palm(s) center with
respect to the palm center of the ﬁrst discovered contour, as
illustrated in Fig. 5(a). The hand disparity value is calculated
as a sum of Euclidean distances between each ﬁngertip and
the palm center. For example, in order to select a candidate
gesture, we compute the disparity between the 40th frame
of an observed gesture [Fig. 5(a)] and of a stored gesture
[Fig. 5(b)], using the following calculation:
SO40 =
M−1
j=1
N−1
i=1 di
N
× w f + C j × wp
M
(1)
where M is the number of hands detected in the image,
N is the number of ﬁngers detected in the image, di is
the difference in the distance from the palm center to the
detected ﬁngertip i in the observed and stored gesture frames,
C j is the difference between the palm centers j in the
stored and observed gesture frames, and w f and wp are the
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:18:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
310
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 65, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016
TABLE I
PARAMETERS FOR THE DTW ALGORITHM
weights for the ﬁnger and palm center disparities, respectively
(the values are listed in Table I). For frames with only one
hand, the palm center disparity is always 0 since the position
is relative to itself. For the situation illustrated in Fig. 5(b),
(1) becomes
SO40
=

(6+15+2+11+1)
5
×1

+0×7

+

(7+1+2+12+3)
5
×1

+14×7
2
= 55.
For a limited number of gestures in which the ﬁngertips
are not visible, the contour points (each tenth point) are
used as a basis to calculate the distance. Since this distance
gets higher for gestures involving multiple hands and ﬁngers,
a normalization operation is applied by the number of ﬁngers,
N, detected in an image in order not to bias the recognition.
For the same reason, the disparity value for an entire image is
obtained by dividing the total hand disparity over all detected
hands by the number of hands, M. If this value is lower than
a threshold (e.g., the maximum Euclidian distance accepted
for a candidate gesture in Table I), the gestures are considered
similar [Fig. 5(c): 29 < 30] or else they are rejected as possible
candidates [Fig. 5(b): 55 > 30].
In step 2), we use the relative position of the palm(s)
center with respect to the corresponding palm center of the
last recorded image, as illustrated in Fig. 6, to validate the
similarity between the observed gesture and each identiﬁed
candidate reference gesture. The gesture disparity is calculated
as the sum of disparities for all images divided by the
number of images. To validate the similarity, SO, between
a candidate and the observed gesture, we use the following
formula based on the set of cells, P, illustrated in Fig. 6(b),
Fig. 6.
Gesture disparity calculation for the validation of the recognized
gesture between the (a) observed gesture and (c) and (d) stored gestures using
the (b) DTW matrix.
Fig. 7.
DTW matrix for (a) static and (b) dynamic gestures.
representing the minimum cost path of the DTW matrix:
SO =
#P
e=1 SOe
#P
(2)
where e = {(x, y)|x ∈S, y ∈F, (x, y) ∈P}, #P represents
the cardinality of the set P, S is the set of stored gesture
frames, and F is the set of observed gestures frames, each
set containing 40 frames. To calculate SOe in (2), we use
the same formula for the selection of candidate (1), but with
dije = ||dijx −C jx| −|dijy −C jy|| and C je = |||C jx −
C j=1,x|−|C j,x=40−C j=1,x=40||−||C jy−C j=1,y|−|C j,y=40−
C j=1,y=40|||, where i and j refer, respectively, to the ﬁnger
and hand identiﬁcation number, x ∈S and y ∈F.
Table I summarizes the empirical choice of parameters used
during experimentation for the DTW.
The value for the maximum Euclidian distance, in pixels,
accepted for a candidate gesture is selected as 30. It represents
a good compromise between the number of candidate gestures
to be processed and the processing time, as in this case, the
40 last images in the list are compared to make a decision.
The maximum cost accepted for a path in the DTW matrix
per image is empirically set to 30. The weights associated with
the directions of movement are experimentally set to 0.005 for
vertical and horizontal directions and 0.003 for the diagonal
direction, in order to favor the latter. When we perform
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:18:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
PLOUFFE AND CRETU: STATIC AND DYNAMIC HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION IN DEPTH DATA USING DTW
311
Algorithm 4 Gesture Recognition Using DTW
Input:
gobs = Last observed gestures (40 images)
gcand = List of candidate gestures (40 images)
Output:
grecogn = Name of recognized gesture (or none:
gesture not recognized)
For each gesture in gcand:
// Get the 2D DTW matrix containing the disparity between
each
// image of both gestures.
dtwMatrix = FindDtwMatrix (gobs, gesture)
// Use a Greedy algorithm to ﬁnd the minimum path cost
in disparities
// in the DTW matrix; return −1 if the cost between two
images is ∞
// or the horizontalMovementCounter > HorizontalMove-
mentThreshold
// or the verticalMovementCounter > VerticalMovement-
Threshold
pathCost = FindLowestCostPath(dtwMatrix)
// Calculate the average Pathcost per image
minPathcostPerFrame = pathCost / gesture.Frames.Count
// Maximum cost accepted per frame = 30
If (minPathcostPerFrame < 30 and pathCost != −1):
return grecogn // name to be displayed on screen
else
return none;
end
end
a search in the DTW matrix for the shortest path, in the
virtual space of frames (observed versus reference gestures), as
illustrated in Fig. 7, the neighboring values of static gestures
are in general equal [Fig. 7(a)]. Thus, any direction in the
DTW matrix could be chosen and the associated gesture could
be falsely rejected based on the path taken. To avoid this
problem, the search is biased (diagonal weight wd is lower
than vertical, wv, and horizontal, wh, weights) to favor the
next image of both reference and last gesture performed,
corresponding to a diagonal movement in the DTW matrix.
In Fig. 7, values in circles inscribed in each cell represent
the hand disparity for each pair of the observed and stored
gestures before applying the DTW direction weight (wh, wv,
and wd). The product of these weights with the circled values
gives the value used for minimal cost computation, indicated
in color on the bottom right of each cell.
To further improve the performance, a maximum number of
ten horizontal and vertical movements are allowed. This results
in a faster elimination of divergent candidate gestures. In order
to select the winning gesture among the gesture candidates,
the one with the smallest disparity value (and that respects
the threshold) is chosen.
The pseudocode summarizing the approach is shown
in Algorithm 4.
Fig. 8.
Examples of contour, palm center, and ﬁngertip detection for (a) one
hand gestures, (b) two hand gestures, (c) multiple hand gestures, and (d) few
problematic cases.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Several experiments were performed in order to test the
proposed system for hand tracking and the localization of
the palm center and of the ﬁngertips. The approach is tested
and evaluated over a series of 55 static and dynamic gestures
for which the results are reported in the literature to enable
performance comparisons.
A. Hand Detection and Tracking
A few samples for the detection of the contour, palm, and
ﬁngertips for one hand are shown in Fig. 8(a), for two hands
in Fig. 8(b), and for multiple hands in Fig. 8(c). It can be
observed that, in general, the proposed solution is able to
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:18:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
312
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 65, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016
Fig. 9.
Relative position of the palm center for dynamic circle gesture
(in blue) and its projections over the x, y, and z axes. z represents the depth.
Fig. 10.
Popular gestures. (a) Complete hand. (b) Victory. (c) OK.
(d) Letter L. (e) Letter Y. (f) I love you. (g) Thumb up. (h) Thumb down.
(i) Star Trek.
correctly locate the points of interest over the hand surface
as well as its contour. A few problematic cases were also
encountered with the proposed solution. Some examples are
illustrated in Fig. 8(d). The palm center, ﬁngers, and contour
are sporadically lost between two consecutive images, and this
behavior is related to the Kinect sensor. Fig. 9 illustrates this
problem by showing the position of the palm center, in pixels,
during the execution of a circle-like dynamic gesture. To deal
with the issue of missing measurements along the z-axis (the
blue points located at the origin in Fig. 9) and of other outliers,
the proposed solution identiﬁes and eliminates them from the
data before proceeding with gesture recognition.
Sometimes double ﬁngertips are identiﬁed for the same
ﬁnger. This is mainly due to the use of the k-curvature
algorithm, which, because of implementation speciﬁcities,
tends to require larger distances between two ﬁngers in order
to make the distinction between them. This problem can be
addressed, for example, by selecting the points that are the
furthest from the palm center. Fingertips can be missing,
in particular for gestures involving heavily bending of ﬁngers
or when occlusions occur due to the superposition of hands.
The latter characterizes all optical motion capture sensors, but
has less impact on the proposed application, since gestures do
not involve occluding hands.
Fig. 11.
Sign number gestures. (a) One. (b) Two. (c) Three. (d) Four.
(e) Five. (f) Six. (g) Seven. (h) Eight. (i) Nine.
B. Static Gesture Recognition
In order to test the performance of the proposed solution,
we have used a set of nine popular gestures, illustrated in
Fig. 10, as proposed in [24], the set of sign digits from
one to nine shown in Fig. 12 as in [7], [18], and [24], and
the ASL alphabet [9], [21], [27]. Figs. 10 and 11 show, for
the ﬁrst two testing sets, the image of each gesture and the
identiﬁed contour, palm center, and ﬁngertips when only the
relative position of the ﬁngers with respect to the palm is
used for recognition. The tests do not take place in controlled
conditions. As one can observe in Figs. 10 and 11, the
background is heavily cluttered. To perform the experimental
testing, for each sign in each test set, reference gestures of a
user are registered in double: one version roughly situated at
950 mm and the other one at roughly 1050 mm. The purpose
of this double recording is to compensate for the scaling effect
due to the use of different distances of the hand with respect
to the camera. Reference gestures are separately recorded for
each category of tests. The ﬁrst part of testing is single blind.
The test user is given a sequence of images corresponding
to different gestures, and he/she is asked to reproduce them.
Each test user is allowed to practice each gesture once before
proceeding with the tests. He/she is then provided in real time
with the recognition results.
During the second part of the test, the user is asked to
reproduce gesture of a sequence of images, but he/she is not
informed whether the gesture was recognized or not (double
blind testing). For each type of test, single or double blind,
each set of tests is repeated ﬁve times by each of the nine test
users and the corresponding color video is recorded to calcu-
late ofﬂine the time required for the recognition. A gesture is
considered unrecognizable if the system is unable to identify
it within a predeﬁned interval after the beginning of its execu-
tion. If the decision ﬂuctuates between two reference gestures,
the observed gesture is considered recognized when the system
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:18:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
PLOUFFE AND CRETU: STATIC AND DYNAMIC HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION IN DEPTH DATA USING DTW
313
Fig. 12.
Comparison for the gestures in the ASL alphabet.
TABLE II
AVERAGE RECOGNITION RATES AND TIME
ESTIMATES FOR SIGN NUMBERS
TABLE III
AVERAGE RECOGNITION RATES AND TIME
ESTIMATES FOR POPULAR GESTURES
decision stabilizes for one of the candidates. If the system
does not stabilize within the interval, it is considered that the
corresponding gesture was not identiﬁed. The results of this
analysis, when using only ﬁngertip information, are shown
for the single- and double-blind tests in Tables II and III,
respectively.
One can observe that the average performance during the
double blind testing is slightly lower than for the one obtained
for the single-blind tests. The slight decrease is justiﬁed by the
lack of feedback to the user, which will not normally be the
case of any natural gesture interface. The tests are nevertheless
TABLE IV
AVERAGE RECOGNITION RATES (%) FOR SIGN NUMBERS
performed to show that, even in such conditions, without any
user adaptation, the performance of the proposed solution does
not degrade signiﬁcantly (overall less than 4% single-blind
versus double-blind variation). In terms of recognition time,
there is no signiﬁcant difference between the two types of tests
(roughly 0.1 s). It is important to state that the time values
reported in Tables II and III include the visual presentation
of the tracking of the contour, palm, and ﬁngertips, not only
the computation time required by the recognition module.
Tables IV and V compare the single-blind tests with related
solutions in the literature.
This comparison gives only a general idea of the perfor-
mance, because overall, very few details are provided in the
literature on the speciﬁc testing scenarios employed. Judging
by the details provided, our approach seems closer in testing
procedure to the one in [24], with three signiﬁcant differences:
1) the distance between the camera and the hand is larger
in our tests (950–1050 versus 500–800 mm); 2) in [24] the
results are calculated for both the left and the right hand;
and 3) tests in [24] seem to be related to a single blind
style of testing. It can be observed in Table IV that for the
sign number recognition, our method outperforms most of the
existing solutions, including the one in [24]. For the popular
gestures, the proposed solution is in line with the existing
literature, as it can be observed in Table V.
The lowest performance was obtained for the more difﬁcult
to execute gestures OK and Star Trek, especially in the case
when only the relative position of ﬁngertips is used. For the
Star Trek sign, the lower rate obtained by our solution might
be explained by the fact that in the case of [24], only two of
four people were able to execute the gesture and the results
are reported for only these two, while in our case, the users
were asked to imitate the gesture to their best possible and
all the user results were included in the evaluation even if the
users were not able to execute the gesture correctly. Overall,
the performance improves when the contour is used as well
in the decision making process, even for gestures including
ﬁngertips (e.g., the results obtained for the OK sign in the
last two columns of Table V). This can be explained by the
fact that, according to the execution of a gesture by different
users, the ﬁngertips can be more or less visible or even lost
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:18:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
314
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 65, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016
TABLE V
RECOGNITION RATES (%) FOR POPULAR GESTURES
during tracking, therefore engaging the use of the contour
information. The addition of the contour comes, however, at
a slightly higher computation cost (Section III-E). Fig. 12
compares the performance of the static gesture recognition
for the ASL alphabet executed with one hand and using the
approach that includes the contour, with solutions proposed
in the literature. The same testing procedure is used as in the
case of popular gestures and sign numbers, but using only
single blind conditions. The missing results for the j and z
signs in Fig. 12 are due to the fact that these two letters are
dynamic and several approaches work only on static data.
It can be observed that the proposed solution (last column)
is similar in performance to [27] for their SVM approach
(penultimate column) with 89.85% average recognition rate
over the alphabet letters for our solution and 90.85% in [27].
One can observe that the proposed solution has difﬁculties in
differentiating between similar gestures such as m and n, and s
and t. These could be addressed using the color camera of the
Kinect to provide extra information about the hand or using a
higher resolution in the processing of each frame in the contour
algorithm. These both come with an additional computational
burden. Alternatively, the z-axis information could be used, but
this implies that the distance from the user to the Kinect has to
be reduced in order to ensure a better contour identiﬁcation.
However, there is no guarantee that overall the results will
improve due to the problem of missing measurements along
the z-axis discussed in Section III-A.
Table VI compares the performance with the solution of
Zhu and Yuan [17] for the set of two hand gestures reported
in their work. The performance of the proposed solution is in
this case better.
A ﬁnal test for static gestures was performed for the
context of natural control of a software application, as shown
in Fig. 13. In particular, the thumb-down gesture was recorded
as a reference gesture to close the interface of our system.
C. Dynamic Gesture Recognition
Additional tests were performed to recognize different
dynamic gestures. A few test gestures are shown in Fig. 14,
and the average recognition rates and a comparison of dynamic
TABLE VI
RECOGNITION RATES (%) FOR TWO HAND GESTURES
Fig. 13.
Natural gesture software application control. (a) Training the system
with the thumb-down gesture to close the application. (b) Series of other
gestures is performed. (c) Thumb-down gesture is executed. (d) Application
is closed 5 s after the gesture is recognized.
Fig. 14.
Dynamic gestures. (a) Click. (b) Going up. (c) Circle. (d) Rectangle.
(e) Triangle.
and static gestures are shown in Table VII. The results are
presented for the proposed approach using single blind testing
following the same procedure used for popular gestures and
sign numbers.
One can observe that overall the system obtains good
recognition rates for dynamic gestures as well. It is important
to state that unlike the system proposed in [24], the one
proposed in this paper (the case of relative position of ﬁngers
is reported) is performing the recognition in real time.
D. Distinction Between Static and Dynamic Gestures
Because the same solution is used to deal with both dynamic
and static gestures, additional testing was performed to test
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:18:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
PLOUFFE AND CRETU: STATIC AND DYNAMIC HAND GESTURE RECOGNITION IN DEPTH DATA USING DTW
315
TABLE VII
RECOGNITION RATES (%) FOR ONE HAND DYNAMIC GESTURES
TABLE VIII
AVERAGE RECOGNITION RATES (%) FOR DTW FOR
VALIDATION AND PROPOSED SOLUTION
TABLE IX
AVERAGE TIME ESTIMATES PER FRAME (ms)
the capability of the system to distinguish between the two
as well as to compare with the case when the DTW is used
only for validation, as in [14]. As stated in Section II-D, the
DTW has in this paper a double role: to identify candidate
gestures and to validate the similarity. Table VIII compares the
proposed solution with the case when the DTW is employed
only for validation. One can observe that, in spite of the fact
that for our solution, some difﬁculties are encountered with
fast movements (e.g., fast consecutive clicks in the ﬁrst line
of Table VIII) and sometimes also in distinguishing between
similar static and dynamic gestures, the results are overall
better than when using DTW for validation only. The latter is
affected by gestures that have similar initial and ﬁnal frames.
E. Average Execution Time
Table IX shows the performance, in terms of the average
execution time per frame, achieved by the proposed solution
with respect to other state-of-the-art approaches. In spite of
the fact that a direct comparison on the same computer is
not possible, it can be observed that the proposed solution is
faster when compared with most of the approaches from the
literature on an almost similar computing platform.
IV. CONCLUSION
This paper presented the development of a novel system
for gesture recognition using depth images collected by a
Kinect sensor. Starting from the closest pixel in the scene, the
initial pixel of the hand contour is found using an improved
block search scheme and a directional search is performed for
the identiﬁcation of the entire hand contour. The k-curvature
algorithm is then employed to locate the ﬁngertips over the
contour. Based on the hand position, the DTW algorithm is
used to select a candidate gesture as well as to recognize
gestures by comparing them with a series of prerecorded ref-
erence gestures. The system achieves an average performance
of 92.4% for one or multiple hand static and dynamic gestures,
with which it is able to deal simultaneously. As only the depth
sensor of the Kinect is employed, the background, the lighting
conditions, the clothing, and the skin color have little impact
on the results obtained by the proposed solution. Nevertheless,
during testing, some problems were encountered when one of
the users wore a bracelet.
As future improvements, an additional module will be added
to allow for a more accurate adaptation of the size of a user
hand instead of the double training at different depths that
is currently implemented in the system. This would improve
the performance at the level of recognition stage. In the same
direction, a different version of DTW [40] will be evaluated
for further speeding up the gesture recognition.
The proposed solution has multiple applications within
the realm of natural user interfaces, from which two were
presented: one for the real-time interpretation of sign digits
and popular gestures and the other one in the context of natural
control of a software application.
REFERENCES
[1] A. R. Várkonyi-Kóczy and B. Tusor, “Human–computer interaction for
smart environment applications using fuzzy hand posture and gesture
models,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 1505–1514,
May 2011.
[2] Q. Chen, N. D. Georganas, and E. M. Petriu, “Hand gesture recognition
using Haar-like features and a stochastic context-free grammar,” IEEE
Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 1562–1571, Aug. 2008.
[3] C.-C. Hsieh and D.-H. Liou, “Novel Haar features for real-time hand
gesture recognition using SVM,” J. Real-Time Image Process., vol. 10,
no. 2, pp. 357–370, Jun. 2015.
[4] S. Mitra and T. Acharya, “Gesture recognition: A survey,” IEEE Trans.
Syst., Man, Cybern. C, Appl. Rev., vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 311–324, May 2007.
[5] J. Suarez and R. R. Murphy, “Hand gesture recognition with depth
images: A review,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Robot Human Interact.
Commun., Paris, France, Sep. 2012, pp. 411–417.
[6] F. T. Cerezo, 3D Hand and Finger Recognition Using Kinect. Granada,
Spain: Univ. Granada, 2013.
[7] Z. Ren, J. Yuan, and Z. Zhang, “Robust hand gesture recognition based
on ﬁnger-earth mover’s distance with a commodity depth camera,” in
Proc. ACM Int. Conf. Multimedia, 2011, pp. 1093–1096.
[8] R. P. Mihail, N. Jacobs, and J. Goldsmith, “Static hand gesture recogni-
tion with 2 Kinect sensors,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Image Process., Comput.
Vis., Pattern Recognit., vol. 2. 2012, pp. 911–917.
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:18:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
316
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INSTRUMENTATION AND MEASUREMENT, VOL. 65, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016
[9] D. Uebersax, J. Gall, M. Van den Bergh, and L. Van Gool, “Real-
time sign language letter and word recognition from depth data,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Barcelona, Spain, Nov. 2011,
pp. 383–390.
[10] K. Kollorz, J. Penne, J. Hornegger, and A. Barke, “Gesture recognition
with a time-of-ﬂight camera,” Int. J. Intell. Syst. Technol. Appl., vol. 5,
nos. 3–4, pp. 334–343, Nov. 2008.
[11] K. Rimkus, A. Bukis, A. Lipnickas, and S. Sinkevicius, “3D human
hand motion recognition system,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Human Syst.
Interact., Sopot, Poland, Jun. 2013, pp. 180–183.
[12] M. Correa, J. Ruiz-del-Solar, R. Verschae, J. Lee-Ferng, and N. Castillo,
“Real-time hand gesture recognition for human robot interaction,” in
RoboCup (Lecture Notes in Computer Science), vol. 5949, J. Baltes,
M. G. Lagoudakis, T. Naruse, and S. S. Ghidary, Eds. Berlin, Germany:
Springer-Verlag, 2010, pp. 46–57.
[13] M. Van den Bergh and L. Van Gool, “Combining RGB and ToF cameras
for real-time 3D hand gesture interaction,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop
Appl. Comput. Vis., Kona, HI, USA, Jan. 2011, pp. 66–72.
[14] D. J. Ryan, “Finger and gesture recognition with Microsoft Kinect,”
M.S. thesis, Dept. Elect. Comput. Eng., Univ. Stavanger, Stavanger,
Norway, 2012.
[15] M. Tang, “Recognizing hand gestures with Microsoft’s Kinect,” Stan-
fordedu, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 303–313, 2011.
[16] I. Oikonomidis, N. Kyriazis, and A. A. Argyros, “Efﬁcient model-based
3D tracking of hand articulations using Kinect,” in Proc. Brit. Mach.
Vis. Conf., 2011, pp. 101.1–101.11.
[17] Y. Zhu and B. Yuan, “Real-time hand gesture recognition with Kinect
for playing racing video games,” in Proc. Int. Joint Conf. Neural Netw.,
Beijing, China, Jul. 2014, pp. 3240–3246.
[18] Z. Ren, J. Meng, and J. Yuan, “Depth camera based hand gesture
recognition and its applications in human-computer-interaction,” in Proc.
IEEE Conf. Inf., Commun. Signal Process., Dec. 2011, pp. 1–5.
[19] Z. Ren, J. Yuan, J. Meng, and Z. Zhang, “Robust part-based hand gesture
recognition using Kinect sensor,” IEEE Trans. Multimedia, vol. 15, no. 5,
pp. 1110–1120, Aug. 2013.
[20] M. Van den Bergh et al., “Real-time 3D hand gesture interaction
with a robot for understanding directions from humans,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Symp. Robot Human Interact. Commun., Atlanta, GA, USA,
Jul./Aug. 2011, pp. 357–362.
[21] K. Otiniano-Rodríguez and G. Cámara-Chávez, “Finger spelling recog-
nition from RGB-D information using kernel descriptor,” in Proc. IEEE
Conf. Graph., Patterns Images, Arequipa, Peru, Aug. 2013, pp. 1–7.
[22] M. Schroder, C. Elbrechter, J. Maycock, R. Haschke, M. Botsch, and
H. Ritter, “Real-time hand tracking with a color glove for the actuation of
anthropomorphic robot hands,” in Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf. Humanoid
Robots, Osaka, Japan, Nov./Dec. 2012, pp. 262–269.
[23] H. Takimoto, S. Yoshimori, Y. Mitsukura, and M. Fukumi, “Classiﬁ-
cation of hand postures based on 3D vision model for human-robot
interaction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Robot Human Interact. Commun.,
Viareggio, Italy, Sep. 2010, pp. 292–297.
[24] Y. Li, “Multi-scenario gesture recognition using Kinect,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Comput. Games, Jul./Aug. 2012, pp. 126–130.
[25] X. Liu and K. Fujimura, “Hand gesture recognition using depth data,”
in Proc. IEEE Conf. Autom. Face Gesture Recognit., May 2004,
pp. 529–534.
[26] N. Pugeault and R. Bowden, “Spelling it out: Real-time ASL ﬁnger-
spelling recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. Workshops
(ICCV Workshops), Barcelona, Spain, Nov. 2011, pp. 1114–1119.
[27] F. Pedersoli, S. Benini, N. Adami, and R. Leonardi, “XKin: An open
source framework for hand pose and gesture recognition using Kinect,”
Vis. Comput., vol. 30, no. 10, pp. 1107–1122, Oct. 2014.
[28] M. R. Abid, P. E. Meszaros, R. F. D. Silva, and E. M. Petriu,
“Dynamic hand gesture recognition for human-robot and inter-robot
communication,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Intell. Virtual Environ.
Meas. Syst. Appl., Ottawa, ON, Canada, May 2014, pp. 12–17.
[29] X. Wu, C. Yang, Y. Wang, H. Li, and S. Xu, “An intelligent interac-
tive system based on hand gesture recognition algorithm and Kinect,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Comput. Intell. Design, Hangzhou, China,
Oct. 2012, pp. 294–298.
[30] N. H. Dardas and N. D. Georganas, “Real-time hand gesture detection
and recognition using bag-of-features and support vector machine tech-
niques,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 3592–3607,
Nov. 2011.
[31] M. Vanco, I. Minarik, and G. Rozinaj, “Evaluation of static hand
gesture algorithms,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Syst., Signals, Image Process.,
Dubrovnik, Croatia, May 2014, pp. 83–86.
[32] M. R. Abid, E. M. Petriu, and E. Amjadian, “Dynamic sign language
recognition for smart home interactive application using stochastic
linear formal grammar,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 64, no. 3,
pp. 596–605, Mar. 2015.
[33] J. M. Palacios, C. Sagüés, E. Montijano, and S. Llorente, “Human-
computer interaction based on hand gestures using RGB-D sensors,”
Sensors, vol. 13, no. 9, pp. 11842–11860, 2013.
[34] Z. Li and R. Jarvis, “Real time hand gesture recognition using a range
camera,” in Proc. Australasian Conf. Robot. Autom., Sydney, NSW,
Australia, 2009, pp. 529–534.
[35] Y. Yao and Y. Fu, “Contour model-based hand-gesture recognition using
the Kinect sensor,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 24,
no. 11, pp. 1935–1944, Nov. 2014.
[36] F. Kobayashi and F. Kojima, “Handover motion based on human
hand posture with hand/arm robot,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Micro-
NanoMechatronics Human Sci., Nagoya, Japan, Nov. 2013, pp. 1–6.
[37] P. Payeur et al., “Human gesture quantiﬁcation: An evaluation tool for
somatic training and piano performance,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Haptic
Audio-Vis. Environ. Games, Dallas, TX, USA, Oct. 2014, pp. 100–105.
[38] E. Keogh and C. A. Ratanamahatana, “Exact indexing of dynamic time
warping,” Knowl. Inf. Syst., vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 358–386, 2005.
[39] M. Müller, “Dynamic time warping,” in Information Retrieval for Music
and Motion. New York, NY, USA: Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 69–82.
[40] G. Al-Naymat, S. Chawla, and J. Taheri, “SparseDTW: A novel approach
to speed up dynamic time warping,” in Proc. Australasian Data Mining
Conf., vol. 101. 2012, pp. 117–127.
Guillaume Plouffe received the B.Sc. degree from
the Université du Québec en Outaouais, Gatineau,
QC, Canada. He is currently pursuing the master’s
degree with the University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON,
Canada.
His current research interests include human–
machine interaction and gesture recognition.
Ana-Maria
Cretu
(S’04–M’10)
received
the
M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the School of Elec-
trical Engineering and Computer Science, University
of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
She is currently an Associate Professor with the
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Université du Québec en Outaouais, Gatineau, QC,
Canada. She has authored over 60 technical papers.
Her current research interests include computational
intelligence, soft computing, biologically inspired
computational models, tactile and vision sensing,
natural human–computer interaction, and 3-D object sensing, modeling, and
manipulation.
Dr. Cretu is a member of the Editorial Board of the Journal of Soft
Computing (Springer). She is a member of the IEEE Instrumentation and
Measurement Society, the IEEE Computational Intelligence Society, and the
IEEE Systems, Man and Cybernetics Society. She serves as a Technical
Committee Member for several international conferences, and a Conference
Organizer and Reviewer for several journals and transactions.
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:18:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
