Traceable In-Air Signature 3D Restoration Record
Structure and In-Air Dominant Hand Biometric
Based on Dynamic Time Warping Algorithm
Yuheng Guo
University of Tokyo
yuhengguo@satolab.itc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Hiroyuki Sato∗
University of Tokyo
schuko@satolab.itc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Abstract—The portable device in-air signature is developing
at a fast speed for the past decades because of the advantage of
being remote and traceless, but it has gained limited application
in the business field. Lacking supervision during the enrollment
phase is one of the security risks for in-air signature recognition.
We propose a traceable in-air signature structure based on 3D
signature restoration for dominant and non-dominant hand in-air
signatures. We designed a dominant hand signature recognition
model based on the dynamic time warping (DTW) algorithm
to reduce the security threat during the enrollment phase of
the in-air signature. By applying the DTW model to, in total,
80 in-air signature dominant and non-dominant hand samples
collected through the self-designed application, the model can
achieve 100% accuracy if more than 6 training samples are taken
for each subject and 0% EER for the available participants.
Index Terms—In-air signature recognition, sensor, security,
privacy, dominant hand recognition
I. INTRODUCTION
With the development of modern mobile phone sensors, the
accuracy of accelerometers and gyroscopes has been improved
to a brand new level, which enables a new field of applica-
tion design related to mobile phone sensors. Mobile phone
in-air signature has been a new substitution for traditional
handwritten signatures, given the advantage of being remote,
trace-less, and convenient [1]. Especially in the era of the
global pandemic, social distancing is regulated by various
global organizations and governments [13]. Being able to
sign signatures in the air using people’s portable devices like
the mobile phone is crucial for the normal conduction of
businesses [14]. Nevertheless, within the previously proposed
in-air signature procedure in many types of research, security
issues exist during the enrollment phase of the in-air signature.
Unlike traditional signatures signing, people have direct eye
supervision throughout the whole process and can easily
distinguish the signer’s dominant hand. The in-air signer could
potentially use their non-dominant hand to finish the in-air
signature enrollment process while using their dominant hand
to sign daily business contracts. Lacking the ability to detect
and trace back the dominant and non-dominant hand in-air
signature records of individuals could pose regulation breaches
and legal ambiguities since the recognition structure of the
dominant hand is not defined by most of the applications.
In this paper, we propose a novel tractable dominant-hand
recognition structure by restoring the 3D in-air signature
records and designing a dominant hand biometric system based
on DTW to improve the security of the in-air signature process.
The model can achieve 100% accuracy if more than 6 training
samples are taken for each subject and 0% EER for the
available participants.
II. RELATED WORK
In-air signature biometrics has been researched extensively
in the past decades and various method has been tested
to improve the accuracy of the recognition model. As in
Abdulhalık O˘guz’s research [5], the research used 387
mobile phone devices of various types to collect individual
information, including the accelerometer data, the voice, and
other information that can be collected from the phone. 3000
samples have been collected for the analysis. The model
used in the research is k nearest neighbor (KNN) and the
randomized neural network (RNN) which gives 99.994%
for KNN and 99.97% for RNN in terms of identifying
individuals. Gonzalo Bailador et al. [1] used the Hidden
Markov Model, Bayes classifiers, and dynamic time warping
algorithms for the analysis of mobile phone in-air signatures.
96 participants are invited to the experiment, from whom 753
valid signatures are collected. The signatures collected are
divided into two categories, which are genuine and imposter
signatures. As a result, the best performance EER for the
HMM model is 5.96% ± 0.55, for the Bayes model is
14.09% ± 0.37, and 4.58% ± 0.51 for the DTW model. In
Elyoenai Guerra-Segura et al.’s research [6], 2000 samples are
collected from 100 subjects with 10 genuine and 10 imposter
signatures. The imposters are further divided into zero-effort
and active imposters. The model used in the experiment is the
Least Square Support Vector Machine, which gives an equal
error rate of 0.25% by zero-effort attackers and 1.20% by
active attackers. Souvik Ghosh et al. [3] used deep learning
network models to improve the accuracy of recognition. The
model used in the research is called ST-SNN. ST-SNN is
mainly a Siamese Neural Network which is consisted of a
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) and Long Short-Term
Memory networks (LSTM). The dataset used in research is an
open-source in-air signature dataset collected by S.K. Behera
et al. [4], which consists of 80 participants and 1600 in-air
2023 6th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Big Data
822
978-1-6654-9125-9/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE
2023 6th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Big Data (ICAIBD) | 978-1-6654-9125-9/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICAIBD57115.2023.10206123
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:19:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
signatures. As a result, the true positive rate is 94.63% and
the False Acceptance Rate is 4.1% for the model. In Javier
Guerra-Casanova’s research [7], Linear discriminant analysis
(LDA) can be used for sequential signals recognition and it
has been applied to in-air signatures in the experiment. 120
gestures have been collected but the EER result is higher than
expected. After dropping out some of the gestures, 4.01% of
EER can be achieved by using the LDA model. S. Wang et
al. [9] analyze the phone’s orientation effect on the sensor’s
accuracy during the process of in-air signature recognition.
The research uses K-means and Random Forest for the
evaluation of continuous authentication on mobile phones.
The mobile phone authentication is all based on a support
vector machine. The author also proposed adaptive models to
reduce the effect of orientation on mobile sensors. By using
the adaptive model, the authentication gives 15.69% FAR and
2.25% FRR. Given the convenience of the in-air signature
being remote and long distance, it would be better to be able
to sign in the air without using any external devices. Yuxun
Fang et al. [2] used camera-captured videos as a reference
to recording individuals’ in-air signatures from videos. They
used the DTW and Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) for the
preprocessing of the data and used Gaussian distributions to
categorize signatures into various sets. They collected the
signature information from 14 subjects and in a total of 560
signatures for the analysis. The model shows 2.86% FRR
and a 1.90% FAR for the in-air signature recognition. Yuxun
Fang’s in-air signature 2D restoration is considered closest
to our approach but we used the original data collected
from sensors and no formal structure for traceable in-air
signature has been proposed in Yuxun Fang et al.’s experiment.
III. SYSTEM MODEL
The Fig. 11 demonstrates the proposed traceable in-air
signature 3D restoration record structure and the dominant
hand recognition model. The participants are required to
input their in-air signatures by signing their name in the air
using the mobile phone software developed through Android
SDK of 20 rounds of signature, 10 rounds of dominant
hand signature, and another 10 rounds of non-dominant
hand signature, are taken into analysis. Those 20 rounds of
signature signals are divided and sent to the 3D signature
restoration model in which a collection of dominant and
non-dominant hand signatures are kept as legal records.
Meanwhile, 20 signature signals will be fed into the dynamic
time warping model for recognition. After training, the
model can distinguish the new signature from the end users
which can tell if the new in-air signature from the user is
signed by the dominant or the non-dominant hand. Only the
dominant hand in-air signatures will be regarded as a valid
legal representation of the juridical person. Every time a new
signature is used for contract purposes, the new signatures
1Some of the symbols in graphs is from flaticon. Graph created based on
drawio.
Fig. 1. Dominant hand recognition system structure
will also be stored in the database paired with the contract.
When legal conflicts happen for the contract, the plaintiff can
apply for verification from the database manager who has
the access to the database and can view both the dominant
and non-dominant hand in-air signatures from the signer and
export 3D signature restoration together with the denial or
approval data history of the DTW model.
IV. PROPOSED METHOD
A. Data Acquisition
In this experiment, we collected the in-air signature using
mobile from 4 participants. Each participant is requested to
sign their 3D signature in the air using the mobile phone
device just like what they would do for handwritten signatures.
For participants, they sign their signature 10 rounds by using
their dominant hand and another 10 rounds using their non-
dominant hand. By clicking on the start signature button when
they are ready and clicking on the finish signature button
when they finish. The temporary 3D signature data will be
stored inside the application. Then the application will direct
participants to the final page where they input their name
information, the number of rounds for the signature, and toggle
the dominant or non-dominant button on the interface. Once
they finish inputting the information, the temporarily stored
data will be sent automatically to the designated email for
analysis. All personal information gathered in the experiment
has gained consent from the participants and all the data are
for the research purpose only.
TABLE I summarizes the configuration of the mobile phone
used in the experiment, to replicate the experiment, it would
823
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:19:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
TABLE I
Configurations of the mobile phone used in the experiment.
Configuration List
Configurations
Information
SoC
Qualcomm Snapdragon 480
CPU
2*2.0 GHz Cortex-A76,6*1.8 GHz Cortex-
A55,Cores:8
GPU
Qualcomm Adreno 619,950 MHz
RAM
4 GB,1800*2400 pixels,24 bits
Fig. 2.
In-air signature collection application structure based on Android
Studio SDK
be ideal to use the configuration indicated in this table. The
in-air signature data are collected based on the application
we developed through the Android Studio SDK on mobile
phone. The whole application structure can be divided into
three main activities and four interfaces as shown in Fig. 2.
The first activity demonstrates the guidance page and shows
the relative information for the in-air signature collection,
which is consisted of a button listen controller. Once the
button is pressed the signature collection process begins. The
application will then be directed to the second activity. The
sensor manager works as the kernel for the linear acceleration
sensor and the gyroscope sensor. Once the sensor manager has
been activated, both the accelerometer and gyroscope will be
attached to it throughout activity two. The x,y, and z coordinate
information will be recorded together with the synchronized
time stamps in the storage. As shown in the TABLE
II,
TABLE II
Eight features were collected from the data collection application.
Feature Collection
Symbol
Feature
Acc x
X-axis linear acceleration
Acc y
Y-axis acceleration
Acc z
Z-axis acceleration
Acc t
Acceleration time stamp
Gyr x
X-axis angular velocity
Gyr y
Y-axis angular velocity
Gyr z
Z-axis angular velocity
Gyr t
Angular velocity time stamp
there are in total 8 features collected for each signature. The
x,y, and z coordinate positive directions defined by Android
Studio are also illustrated in the Fig. 2. More specifically, the
Android Studio axis coordinate system defines the positive x-
axis direction as the horizontal line from the left to the right
when a user is holding a phone. The positive y-axis direction
is defined as the direction that goes into the paper. The positive
z-axis is defined to point toward the user’s head. No matter
how the orientation of the user changes, the coordinate will
not change as long as the user is holding the phone. The unit
for the accelerometer and gyroscope are all meters per second
squared while the unit for the timer is in milliseconds. The
data information is stored in the format shown in the TABLE
III.
TABLE III
Sample data from the collection application. The precision is 7 digits after
the decimal, omitted here in the table.
Sample Data Format
sensor
x-axis
y-axis
z-axis
Time
Acc
-5.48
-5.95
1.45
1086
Gyr
3.547
-4.92
-3.80
1090
TABLE
IV demonstrates the sensor sampling frequency
that can be adjusted by tuning the SENSOR DELAY parameter.
The table shows the available sampling rate for the application.
For this experiment, we choose SENSOR DELAY NORMAL
for both the accelerometer and gyroscope which is 215-230ms
per sample. The sensors will detect the sampling request
information by calling the function OnSensorChanged().
Once the participant has finished the signature, the finish
signature button will be pressed. Both the accelerometer and
gyroscope will be detached from the sensor manager to save
the phone energy and improve the software performance.
Then the participants will be directed to the third activity
in which their information will be collected, including their
name, the number of rounds, and the category of hand. The
third activity is designed with the email intent object which
could access the temporarily stored data information and send
it to the designated email address automatically. In Fig. 3
ranging from the left to right represents the 4 interfaces in
the collection application and the last interface shows the
data gathered for one signature.
TABLE IV
Available sampling parameters and sampling rate for Android Studio SDK
Available Sampling Rate
Sensor
Parameter
Sampling Rate
Acc
FASTEST
18-20 ms
Acc
GAME
37-39 ms
Acc
UI
85-87 ms
Acc
NORMAL
215-230 ms
Orientation
FASTEST
16-17 ms
Orientation
GAME
37-39 ms
Orientation
UI
77 ms
Orientation
NORMAL
224-225 ms
824
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:19:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
Fig. 3. In-air signature collection application interface
B. Data Analysis
Fig. 4. Ten rounds of dominant hand acceleration signals.The y-axis of the
graph shows the altitude of the sensor in meters per seconds squared. The
blue line represents the x-axis acceleration, the yellow dashed line shows the
y-axis acceleration, and the green dashed line represents the z-axis.
Fig. 5. Ten rounds of non-dominant hand acceleration signals.The y-axis of
the graph shows the altitude of the sensor in meters per seconds squared. The
blue line represents the x-axis acceleration, the yellow dashed line shows the
y-axis acceleration, and the green dashed line represents the z-axis.
Once the data information has been gathered, we are in-
terested in finding the pattern of the data and which feature
contains most of the information that can help us distinguish
dominant and non-dominant hand in-air signatures. More
specifically, the x,y, and z-axis signals are extracted and
compared through multiple rounds of signatures and the 3D
representation of those signals is also illustrated visually to
give a clearer impression. As shown in the Fig. 4, 10 rounds
of the dominant hand acceleration signals are drawn for
comparison. The x-axis of the graph shows the time converted
from millisecond to second. From the graph, we could observe
that even though 10 rounds of dominant hand in-air signatures
have subtle differences, they overall show similar patterns. The
position of the peaks and valleys reside in similar timeline
locations. The x-axis and z-axis show much larger fluctuation
while the y-axis is relatively stable. The reason is that when
people sign in-air signatures, they tend to imagine drawing
on 2D paper. Therefore, the x-axis and z-axis may give rich
information in determining the dominant hand. Similarly, in
the Fig. 5, for 10 rounds of the non-dominant hand acceleration
signal graph, the signal waves show much larger fluctuation
compared with the dominant ones, especially for the y-axis.
Fig. 6. Ten rounds of 3D dominant hand acceleration signals
Fig. 7. Ten rounds of 3D non-dominant hand acceleration signals
To better illustrate and observe the difference between the
dominant and non-dominant in-air signature, 10 rounds of each
signature are drawn in three-dimensional graphs as shown in
the Fig. 6 and Fig. 7. The time variable is represented from the
deep blue color to the deep red color. The 3D representation
of the signal shows a larger variance but the shape of the
curve for the dominant hand (right hand in this sample) in
the Fig. 6 shows that they all range from the first quadrant
to the third quadrant, which complies with the subject’s right-
hand writing habit. Similarly, in the Fig. 7, despite the shape
variance, the tendency all goes from the second quadrant to
the fourth quadrant. The dominant hand and non-dominant
hand could exhibit huge tendency variance, which confirmed
our expectation that if a person uses the non-dominate hand
for signature enrollment while using the dominant hand for
signing a contract, the system won’t be able to categorize them
into the same Juridical Person.
Fig. 8. Ten rounds accelerometer signals dominant and non-dominant hand
comparison. The blue lines represent 10 rounds of dominant signature signals,
and the red lines represent 10 rounds of non-dominant signature signals. The
cyan line represents the average dominant signal. The green line represents
the average non-dominant signal.
In Fig. 8, the accelerometer comparison and Fig. 9, the
gyroscope comparison, the amplitude of average signals for
825
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:19:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
Fig. 9.
Ten rounds gyroscope signals dominant and non-dominant hand
comparison. The blue lines represent 10 rounds of dominant signature signals,
and the red lines represent 10 rounds of non-dominant signature signals. The
cyan line represents the average dominant signal. The green line represents
the average non-dominant signal.
Fig. 10.
Ten rounds velocity signals dominant and non-dominant hand
comparison. The blue lines represent 10 rounds of dominant signature signals,
and the red lines represent 10 rounds of non-dominant signature signals. The
cyan line represents the average dominant signal. The green line represents
the average non-dominant signal.
dominant and non-dominant in-air hand signatures not only
exhibit a mismatch in the amplitude but also have reversed
peak and valley. Nevertheless, for the Fig. 10 of the linear ve-
locity signal comparison, the z-axis signals show tremendous
differences and we need to consider those features in dynamic
time warping calculation.
Algorithm 1 Dynamic Time Warping Algorithm [8]
1. Input: series u = {u1, u2, . . . , uTu} series v =
{v1, v2, . . . , vTv}
2. Base conditions:
g(0, 0) = 0
g(1, 1) = d (u1, v1) · wD
g(i, 0) = ∞
for 1 ≤i ≤Tu
g(0, j) = ∞
for 1 ≤j ≤Tv
3. Recursive relation:
g(i, j) = min



g(i, j −1) + d (ui, vj) · wV
g(i −1, j −1) + d (ui, vj) · wD
g(i −1, j) + d (ui, vj) · wH
for 1 ≤i ≤Tu and 1 ≤j ≤Tv
4. Output: DTW-distance D(u, v) = k(w) · g (Tu, Tv)
Algorithm
1 explains the programming algorithm of dy-
namic time warping, in which two sequential signals are taken
as the input for the model [8]. In our case, two sequential
in-air signature signals are taken into consideration at each
time of the calculation. For each participant, we have 20 in-
air signatures, which gives us in a total of 400 calculations
of the dynamic time warping distance. We build a dynamic
time warping cost matrix whose dimension complies with the
dimension of two signals and four based conditions are needed
to initialize the cost matrix. The zero origins are initialized
to zero and the second element of the second row and of
the second column is initialized as the starting distance of
each signal. For the first row and first column, each element
is initialized to be an infinitely large number. Then, moving
from the origin, each cell of the DTW cost matrix is set to the
minimum value of the neighboring 4 element cells with tuning
coefficients. Then the final distance is the last element cell of
the whole cost matrix. Going backward from the last cell to
the initial cell, a warping path is calculated by connecting the
minimum element cell which generates the shortest path to
the origin of the cost matrix. The warping path tells us the
alignment among different points of two sequential signals.
Unlike the transitional point-wise alignment, multiple elements
being equal in the horizontal and vertical direction of the cost
matrix indicates one-to-many alignment among two signals.
Fig. 11.
Signature alignment for signature signals belonging to the same
category using dynamic time warping. The orange and blue lines illustrate
two signature signals belonging to the same category but of different time
lengths.
Fig. 11 shows the alignment of the two linear acceleration
signals. DTW algorithm can align the similar peaks and valleys
of two signals as shown by those yellow lines. The Fig. 12
demonstrates the visual representation of the dynamic time
warping cost matrix in which the two signature signals are
drawn at the left and the top part of the graph and the sample
signals belong to the same signature category. The top left
corner of the graph shows the DTW distance value between
those two sample signals, which is 34.6936. As explained in
the algorithm part of dynamic time warping, the element cost
is depicted as ranging from blue to light yellow, with the blue
being lower cost and the yellow being higher cost. The red
line is the warping path of the DTW cost matrix, two perfectly
matching signals give a straight warping path from the origin
to the last cell of the cost matrix. The blue parts of the graph
are all surrounded around the warping path, which indicates a
higher cost of alignment while the yellow part is all far away
826
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:19:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
Fig. 12. Dynamic Time Warping Cost Matrix
from the warping path indicating a higher cost.
C. Three Dimensional Data Restoration
Fig. 13. Ten rounds of 3D dominant hand in-air signature Restoration
Fig. 14. Ten rounds of 3D dominant hand in-air signature Restoration
Given the in-air signature has the advantage of being trace-
less, the signer could sign and send the in-air signature
digitally. Nevertheless, being trace-less also means that there
is no way of tracing whether the in-air signature is signed by
a dominant or non-dominant hand in an explicit way, which
can be a security threat to the business and legal contract.
Therefore, being able to reconstruct the 3D restoration of the
in-air signature is crucial and it can be helpful in terms of
working as an important record for identification. Aligning
the in-air signature data with the visible 3D signature restora-
tion can reduce the legal ambiguities in the business when
two parties use the in-air signatures to sign their contract.
As explained in the system model section, in our proposed
structure, the restoration of 3D in-air signatures could be
kept in a centralized database to trace back the signature
history and work as a legal backup when conflict happens.
Fig. 13 and Fig. 14 demonstrate the recovered dominant
and non-dominant 3D in air signatures respectively. During
the restoration process, multiple engineering obstacles have
been solved. Firstly, the mobile phone calculates acceleration
based on all the force applied to the phone, including gravity.
The gravity-included data exhibit abnormally high negative
acceleration for the z-axis during the signing process. Not only
for the z-axis, the gravity will also be applied to other axes
during rotation. During the restoration of the signature, the
effect of gravity is needed to be eliminated. Otherwise, the
gravity will affect the whole data set and can’t be normalized,
which will result in that the restored signature will turn to a
straight line. In this experiment, we used the Android Studio
TYPE LINEAR ACCELERATION parameter that can elimi-
nate the gravity’s effect by combining the angular velocity
together with the linear acceleration but sacrificing a certain
degree of accuracy. Secondly, the unit of the accelerometer
in the Android Studio is meters per seconds squared and the
timer in the JAVA library is in the millisecond, if the unit is
not consistent, the restoration will be out of scale. Thirdly, the
accelerometer and the gyroscope x,y,z, and t lists are needed to
have an initial element zero to start with, otherwise, the result
is not visible. In the end, the accelerometer will introduce
inevitable noise to the system. After taking two integrals of
acceleration with respect to time, we are expected to get the
location signal that can be used for restoration, but the real
meaningful location signals are buried within the noise and
the 3D position signal will become a single smooth line.
After testing, the best solution is to use the velocity vector
to restore the 3D signatures. Normalization is also needed to
be applied to three axes respectively and there are two main
normalization methods, one is with respect to the summation
of the list and the other one is with respect to the maximum
element in the list. After testing, the summation normalization
can better restore the 3D signature, which is also used as the
normalization method for the DTW model covered in the result
section.
V. RESULT
In our research, we constructed a 20 by 20 DTW distance
matrix for each participant in which the first 10 rows and
columns all belong to the dominant hand signatures while the
last 10 rows and columns all belong to the non-dominant hand
signatures. The distances among each signal are calculated
in the DTW distance matrix, which in total gives us 400
distance elements for each participant. During the experiment,
8 features are collected for each signature as shown in the TA-
BLE II, which means we need to calculate 8, 20 by 20, DTW
distance matrix for each signature. As shown in the Fig. 15, by
827
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:19:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
Fig. 15. DTW euclidean distance matrix calculation
overlapping those 8 matrices into one 20 by 20 tuple matrix
with the elements being tuples containing 8 feature distances.
The final DTW distance matrix is calculated by applying the
euclidean distance to each of the tuple elements.
Fig. 16. The dominant hand and non-dominant hand comparison box plot for
4 participants. SX(D/N) means the number X participant’s dominant(D)/non-
dominant signature(N).
As shown in the Fig. 16, the dominant hand and non-
dominant hand DTW distance variations among 4 participants
is depicted as box plot. Those two categories show large
differences in terms of the distribution of DTW distances,
which explains the reason why DTW can distinguish one
set of signatures from the other with high accuracy. Notably,
the graph does show a non-intuitive phenomenon. During the
planning phase of the experiment, the large variation differ-
ence between the dominant and non-dominant is expected
but the non-dominant hand is expected to show a larger
variation. Nevertheless, the data exhibit that the dominant
hand signatures show much larger variation compared with
the non-dominant hand signatures. The reason why domi-
nant hand signatures show much larger variance compared
with the non-dominant hand signatures can be explained by
C.A.ARMSTRONG et al. [12]. The research performed a
strength comparison between the dominant and non-dominant
hand using Maximum voluntary contraction (MVC) and 3%
of strength differences are found for the right-handed subjects,
which means that individual’s dominant hand is much more
flexible and can generate more signature variations compared
with the relatively rigid non-dominant hands.
Fig. 17. DTW distance among 20 signatures with the first 10 signatures being
the dominant hand and the last 20 signatures being the non-dominant hand
Fig. 17 is one of the DTW distance matrices for participants,
each pixel represents a distance calculated by DTW, with
the deep blue color representing a smaller distance value
while yellow represents a larger distance value. The first
and the third quadrants are the quadrants where the distance
of dominant and non-dominant signature distances are. The
second quadrant is the distances among 10 dominant hand in-
air signatures while the fourth quadrant is the distances of
10 non-dominant signatures. The first and the fourth quadrant
shows a clear color difference compared with the rest of the
two quadrants, which indicates that DTW distance can be
an efficient tool for distinguishing the dominant and non-
dominant hand in-air signatures. In order to categorize 20
signatures, we need to find a reference signature signal,
which is determined by calculating the overall distance of
each signature among the rest of the signatures within the
same category. Therefore, for each participant, two reference
signatures are determined through 6 training samples. The
rest of the signatures, dominant and non-dominant signatures,
are testing samples which are categorized by calculating the
relative DTW distance with the reference signature. To tune
for the best performance, coefficient M dominant and M non-
dominant are added to better calculate the decision boundary.
False acceptance rate(FAR) and false rejection rate(FRR)
are widely used in many biometric types of research, and we
use them to empirically examine the performance of the DTW
algorithm on our data set. As shown in (1) [11], FAR concerns
the number of imposter samples that are categorized into the
real samples while the FRR represents the rate when the real
828
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:19:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
samples are categorized into the imposter samples.
FAR = | {s | q ∈Sig Dominant Hand, s ≥∆} |
| Sig Dominant Hand |
FRR = | {s | q ∈Sig Non-dominant Hand, s < ∆} |
| Sig Non-dominant Hand |
(1)
Fig. 18. False acceptance curve and the false rejection curve
We take 6, 3 dominant and 3 non-dominant, in air signature
samples for training with regard for each participants and
14 samples for testing. As shown in the Fig. 18, the false
acceptance rate curve stays in the high position starting from
the 0 sensitivity and drops down steeply during the 0.4 to 0.5
sensitivity range. Similarly, for the false rejection rate curve,
it stays in the low position before 0.5 sensitivity and rises
up. The point where those two curve intercept is called Equal
Error Rate(EER) which is 0.0. The result shows the model can
successfully detect the dominant and non-dominant hand with
100% accuracy for 4 participants even with small number of
training cases.
VI. RESEARCH LIMITATION
Given the performance of the DTW algorithm on the
small database, however, a larger database containing more
participants should be gathered to better analyze the result. For
future studies, more algorithms like the k-nearest neighbor,
and deep learning methods like the recurrent neural network,
and LSTM should be conducted for the research.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a novel traceable dominant hand
in-air signature 3D restoration structure for business records
and legal documents. The structure restores multiple rounds
of the dominant and non-dominant hand signatures into the
designated database that can be traced back by server man-
agers once in-air signature-related legal ambiguities happen.
The proposed structure can be used to improve the security
of current in-air signature applications once constructed. We
invited 4 participants to join our research and collected mini-
size data set for the purpose of dominant hand recognition
using a dynamic time warping algorithm to detect the signal
distance between one’s dominant and non-dominant hand
signatures. The DTW algorithm has the advantage of being fast
and reducing energy consumption compared with other deep
learning models, which is especially preferable for portable
devices. By using the relative distance from the DTW cost
matrix, we can precisely divide the dominant signatures from
the non-dominant ones, our algorithm shows 100% accuracy
and 0% EER for available participants even with small number
of training cases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by the University of Tokyo,
Graduate School of Engineering, Department of Electrical
Engineering Interdisciplinary Information, SEUT scholarship.
REFERENCES
[1] Gonzalo Bailador, Carmen Sanchez-Avila, Javier Guerra-Casanova, Al-
berto de Santos Sierra, ”Analysis of pattern recognition techniques for
in-air signature biometrics”, Pattern Recognition, Volume 44, Issues
10–11, 2011, Pages 2468-2478, ISSN 0031-3203.
[2] Yuxun Fang, Wenxiong Kang, Qiuxia Wu, Lei Tang, ”A novel video-
based system for in-air signature verification”, Computers & Electrical
Engineering, Volume 57, 2017, Pages 1-14,ISSN 0045-7906.
[3] Souvik Ghosh, Spandan Ghosh, Pradeep Kumar, Erik Scheme, Partha
Pratim Roy, ”A novel spatio-temporal Siamese network for 3D signature
recognition”, Pattern Recognition Letters, Volume 144, 2021, Pages 13-
20, ISSN 0167-8655.
[4] S.K. Behera , D.P. Dogra , P.P. Roy , ”Analysis of 3D signatures recorded
using leap motion sensor”, Multimed. Tools Appl., Volume 77 (11),
2018, pages 14029–14054.
[5] Abdulhalık O˘guz, ¨Omer Faruk Ertu˘grul, ”Human identification based
on accelerometer sensors obtained by mobile phone data”, Biomedical
Signal Processing and Control, Volume 77, 2022, 103847, ISSN 1746-
8094.
[6] Elyoenai Guerra-Segura, Aysse Ortega-P´erez, Carlos M. Travieso, ”In-
air signature verification system using Leap Motion”, Expert Systems
with Applications, Volume 165, 2021, 113797, ISSN 0957-4174,
[7] J. Guerra-Casanova, C. S´anchez- ´Avila, A. de-Santos-Sierra and G.
Bailador, ”A robustness verification system for mobile phone authen-
tication based on gestures using Linear Discriminant Analysis,” 2011
Third World Congress on Nature and Biologically Inspired Computing,
2011, pp. 157-162, doi: 10.1109/NaBIC.2011.6089452.
[8] Furlanello, Cesare & Merler, Stefano
Jurman, Giuseppe, ”Com-
bining feature selection and DTW for time-varying functional ge-
nomics”, Signal Processing, IEEE Transactions on. 54. 2436 - 2443.
10.1109/TSP.2006.873715.
[9] S. Wang, J. Yuan and J. Wen, ”Adaptive Phone Orientation Method
for Continuous Authentication Based on Mobile Motion Sensors,” 2019
IEEE 31st International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence
(ICTAI), 2019, pp. 1623-1627, doi: 10.1109/ICTAI.2019.00236.
[10] Saleem, Mohammad & Kovari, Bence. (2019). ”Survey of Signature
Verification Databases”. 10.26649/musci.2019.027.
[11] G. Li and H. Sato, ”Sensing In-Air Signature Motions Using Smart-
watch: A High-Precision Approach of Behavioral Authentication,” in
IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 57865-57879, 2022, doi: 10.1109/AC-
CESS.2022.3177905.
[12] C.A. ARMSTRONG, J.A. OLDHAM, ”A Comparison of Dominant and
Non-dominant Hand Strengths”, The Journal of Hand Surgery: British
European Volume, Volume 24, Issue 4, 1999, Pages 421-425, ISSN
0266-7681,
[13] Qian, M., Jiang, J. ”COVID-19 and social distancing”, J Public Health
(Berl.), Volume 30, 2022, Pages 259–261.
[14] Guerra-Casanova, J., S´anchez- ´Avila, C., Jara-Vera, V., de-Santos-Sierra,
A., Bailador, G., ”Architectures to Implement In-Air Signature Mobile
Authentication to Increase the Security of E-Commerce Applications and
Opinion of End Users.” Communications in Computer and Information
Science, 2011, Volume 194. Pages 478-492.
829
horized licensed use limited to: AMRITA VISHWA VIDYAPEETHAM AMRITA SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING. Downloaded on September 08,2026 at 04:19:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions app
